 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
CSAT 2012 Paper – 2 Solved 
SET-C 
 
Directions for the following 6 (six) items: 
Read the following two passages and Solution: the items that follow each passage. Your 
Solutions to these items should be based on the passages only. 
Passage I 
The poor especially in market economics need the strength that collectivities offer for 
creating more economic, social and political space for themselves, for enhancing their socio-
economic well-being and voice, and as a protection against free market individualism. It has 
been argued that a group approach to farming, especially in the form of bottom up 
agricultural production collectivities, offers substantial scope for poverty alleviation and 
empowering the poor as well as enhancing agricultural productivity. To realize this 
potential, however, the groups would need to be voluntary in nature, small in size, 
participative in decision making and equitable in work sharing and benefit distribution. 
There are many notable examples of such collectivities to be found in varied contexts, such 
as in transitions economies. All of them bear witness to the possibility of successful 
cooperation under given conditions. And although the gender impact of the family 
cooperatives in the transition economies are uncertain, the Indian examples of women-only 
groups farming offer considerable potential for benefiting women. 
1. Agricultural collectivities such as group based farming can provide the rural poor 
1. Empowerment 
2. Increased agricultural productivity. 
3. Safeguard against exploitative markets. 
4. Surplus production of agricultural commodities. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Select the correct Solution: using the codes given below: 
a) 1, 2, 3 and 4 
b) 1, 2 and 3 only 
c) 2 and 4 only 
d) 1, 3 and 4 only 
Solution: b) 
“protection against free market individualism” tells that statement 3 is correct. Rest others 
are very explicitly mentioned in the passage. 
 
 
2. What does the author imply by “gender impact”? 
a) Women are doubtful participants in cooperatives. 
b) Family cooperatives may not include women 
c) Women benefitting from group farming. 
d) Women’s role in transition economies is highly restrictive. 
Solution: c) 
Clear from the passage.  
 
3. Consider the following assumptions: 
1. It is imperative for transition economies to have agricultural collectivities. 
2. Agricultural productivity can be increased by group approach to farming. 
With reference to the above passage which of these assumptions is/are valid? 
a) 1 only 
b) 2 only 
c) Both 1 and 2 
d) Neither 1 nor 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Solution: b) 
The word “imperative” is an extreme word. It means something which is absolutely 
necessary. The passage only says that they are helpful. 
  
Passage II 
In a typical Western liberal context, deepening of democracy invariably leads to 
consolidation of ‘liberal values’. In the Indian context, democratization is translated into 
greater involvement of people not as ‘individuals’ which is a staple to liberal discourse, but 
as communities or groups. Individuals are getting involved in the public sphere not as 
‘atomized’ individuals but as members of primordial communities drawn on religious or 
caste identity. Community-identity seems to be the governing force. It is not therefore 
surprising that the so-called peripheral groups continue to maintain their identities with 
reference to the social groups {caste, religion or sect} to which they belong while getting 
involved in the political processes despite the fact that their political goals remain more or 
less identical.  By helping to articulate the political voice of the marginalized, democracy in 
India has led to ‘a loosening of social strictures’ and empowered the peripherals to be 
confident of their ability to improve the socio economic conditions in which they are placed. 
This is a significant political process that had led to a silent revolution through a meaningful 
transfer of power from the upper caste cities to various subaltern groups within the 
democratic framework of public governance. 
4. According to the passage, what does “deepening of democracy” mean in the Western 
context? 
a) Consolidation of group and class identities. 
b) Democratization translated as greater involvement of people. 
c) Democratization as greater involvement of ‘atomized’ individuals in the public sphere. 
d) None of the statements a, b and c given above is correct in this context. 
Solution: d) 
Option (a) talks about the Indian context. Option (b) talks about democracy in general. 
Option (c) talks about the consequences of democratization in a normal society. In the 
Western context it simply means people embrace liberal values. So, none of the statements 
are correct. 
A careful reading of passage will give you the solutions. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
5. Greater democratization in India has not necessarily led to 
a) The dilution of caste and communal identities in the public sphere. 
b) Irrelevance of community identity as governing force in Indian politics. 
c) Marginalization of elite groups in society. 
d) Relative unimportance of hereditary identities over class identities. 
Solution: b) 
Option (a) could have been true; but its very general – it talks about public sphere; and not 
Indian politics in specific.  
So, lesson is: Keep a check on general and over-arching statements. 
 
6. What is the “silent revolution” that has occurred in the Indian democratic process? 
a) Irrelevance of caste and class hierarchies in political processes 
b) Loosening of social strictures in voting behavior and patterns. 
c) Social change through transfer of power from upper caste elites to subaltern groups. 
 d) All the statements a), b) and c) given above are correct in this context. 
Solution: c) 
Option (a) is incorrect, which also makes option (d) incorrect. 
Option (b) is incorrect, because the loosening has not been in the voting behaviour; it has 
been towards the social structures and participation in the political process. 
If you see this line “– ‘loosening of social strictures’ and empowered the peripherals to be 
confident of their ability to improve the socio economic conditions in which they are placed. 
This is a significant political process that had led to a silent revolution”, you will understand 
the solution.  
 
Directions for the following 5 (five) items: 
Examine the information given in the following paragraph and Solution: the items that 
follow: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Guest lectures on five subjects viz., Economics, History, Statistics, English and Mathematics 
have to be arranged in a week from Monday to Friday. Only one lecture can be arranged on 
each day. Economics cannot be scheduled on Tuesday. Guest faculty for History is available 
only on Tuesday. Mathematics lecture has to be schedules immediately after the day of 
Economics lecture. English lecture has to be scheduled immediately before the day of 
Economics lecture. 
7. Which lecture is scheduled on Monday? 
a) History 
b) Economics 
c) Mathematics 
d) Statistics 
Solution: d) 
Simply write the days and cross the ones that are not applicable. You will get the answer. 
Since Tuesday’s schedule is fixed – for English to come immediately before economics, and 
economics to come immediately before maths, this will be the arrangement. 
Monday - Statistics 
Tuesday – E,   H 
Wednesday – English 
Thursday – Economics 
Friday –Mathematics 
 
8. Which lecture is scheduled between Statistics and English? 
a) Economics 
b) History 
c) Mathematics 
d) No lecture 
Solution: b) 
As seen from the table we drew. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
9. Which lecture is the last one in the week? 
a) History 
b) English 
c) Mathematics 
d) Economics 
Solution: c) 
As from the table. 
10. Which lecture is located scheduled on Wednesday? 
a) Statistics 
b) Economics 
c) English 
d) History 
Solution: c) 
Straight from the table. 
 
11. Which lecture is scheduled before the Mathematics lecture? 
a) Economics 
b) History 
c) Statistics 
d) English 
Solution: a) 
This is clear from the question itself. 
 
12. Two glasses of equal volume are respectively half and three-fourths filled with milk. 
They are then filled to the brim by adding water. Their contents are then poured into 
another vessel. What will be the ratio of milk to water in this vessel? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
a) 1:3 
b) 2:3 
c)3:2 
d) 5:3 
Solution: d) 
Lets say both glasses have 100 ml capacity. 
Glass 1: 50 ml water and 50 ml milk 
Glass 2: 25 ml water and 75 ml milk 
Total when poured together = 200 ml 
Milk = 125 ml 
Water = 75 ml 
Ration = 125:75 = 5:3 
13. Consider the following statements: 
1. All machines consume energy 
2. Electricity provides energy 
3. Electrically operated machines are cheap to maintain 
4. Electrically operated machines do not cause pollution. 
Which one of the following inferences can be drawn from the above statements? 
a) All machines are run by electric energy. 
b) There is no form of energy other than electricity 
c) Most machines are operated on electric energy. 
d) Electrically operated machines are preferable to use. 
Solution: d) 
Lets critically analyse each option. 
O1: Just because all machines consume energy; and electricity provides energy, does not 
mean that electricity is the only source of energy. Machines can run on other sources of 
energy too. So it is wrong. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
O2: Electricity provides energy does not mean it is only source providing energy. Hence, O2 
is also wrong. 
O3: In the light of the above discussion, O3 is also wrong. 
O4: From statements 3 and 4, this seems the most reasonable option. Hence, (d)  
 
 
14. Examine the following statements: 
1. None but the rich ran afford air-travel. 
2. Some of those who travel by air become sick 
3. Some of those who become sick require treatment 
Which one of the following conclusions can be drawn from the above statements? 
a) All the rich persons travel by air. 
b) Those who travel by air become sick 
c) All the rich persons become sick. 
d) All those who travel by air are rich 
Solution: d) 
Option (a) is incorrect because even if the rich can afford air travel, its not necessary that 
every rich person will travel by air. 
Since (b) is also incorrect, (c) has to be incorrect. Option (d) is the correct answer. 
 
 
15. In five flats, one above the other, live five professionals. The professor has to go up to 
meet his IAS officer friend. The doctor is equally friendly to all, and has to go up as 
frequently as go down. The engineer has to go up to meet his MLA friend above whose flat 
lives the professor's friend. 
From the ground floor to the top floor, in what order do the five professionals live? 
a) Engineer, Professor, Doctor, IAS officer, MLA 
b) Professor, Engineer, Doctor, IAS officer, MLA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
c) IAS officer, Engineer, Doctor, Professor, MLA 
d) Professor, Engineer, Doctor, MLA, IAS officer 
Solution: d) 
It is clear that the doctor is at the centre and the MLA stays above the Engineer.  
It is also given that IAS officer is professor’s friend. So, IAS officer must stay above Engineer 
and MLA. Only the last option is satisfying the above conditions. 
You can also check it by drawing a diagram. 
S1: IAS>....>Prof 
S2: Doc is in the middle 
S3: IAS>..MLA>..>Engineer 
Now only way in which these can be satisfied is: 
IAS>MLA>Doctor> Engineer> Professor  
 
Directions for the following 15 (fifteen) items: 
Read the following three passages and solve the items that follow each passage. Your 
Solutions to these items should be based on the passages only. 
Passage I 
Education, without a doubt, has an important functional, instrumental and utilitarian 
dimension. This is revealed when one asks questions such as 'what is the purpose of 
education?'. The Solutions, too often, are 'to acquire qualifications for employment/upward 
mobility', 'wider/higher (in terms of income) opportunities', and 'to meet the needs for 
trained human power in diverse field for national development'. But in its deepest sense 
education is not instrumentalist. That is to say, it is not to be justified outside of itself 
because it leads to the acquisition of formal skills or of certain desired psychological – social 
attributes. It must be respected in itself. Education is thus not a commodity to be acquired 
or possessed and then used, but a process of inestimable importance to individuals and 
society, although it can and does have enormous use value. Education then, is a process of 
expansion and conversion, not in the sense of conversion turning students into doctors or 
engineers, but the widening and turning out of the mind – the creation, sustenance and 
development of self-critical awareness and independence of thought. It is an inner process 
of moral-intellectual development. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
16. What do you understand by the 'instrumentalist' view of education? 
a) Education is functional and utilitarian in its purposes. 
b) Education is meant to fulfill human needs 
c) The purpose of education is to train the human intellect 
d) Education is meant to achieve moral development 
Solution: a) 
Observe the following lines: “But in its deepest sense education is not instrumentalist. That 
is to say, it is not to be justified outside of itself…” 
Options 2, 3 and 4 are mentioned in the passage as the outcomes of education. 
Hence, the correct answer is option 1. 
 
17. According to the passage, education must be respected in itself because 
a) It helps to acquire qualifications for employment. 
b) It helps in upward mobility and acquiring social status. 
c) It is an inner process of moral and intellectual development 
d) All the a), b) and c) given above are correct in this context. 
Solution: c) 
This is clearly mentioned in the passage. 
 
 
18. Education is a process in which 
a) Students are converted into trained professionals. 
b) Opportunities for higher income are generated 
c) individuals develop self-critical awareness and independence of thought 
d) qualifications for upward mobility are acquired 
Solution: c) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
This has also been clearly mentioned in the last few lines. 
 
 
Passage II 
Chemical pesticides lose their role in sustainable agriculture if the pests evolve resistance. 
The evolution of the pesticide resistance is simply natural selection in action. It is almost 
certain to occur when vast numbers of a genetically variable population are killed. One or a 
few individuals may be unusually resistant (perhaps because they possess an enzyme that 
can detoxify the pesticide). If the pesticide is applied repeatedly, each successive generation 
of the pest will contain a larger proportion of resistant individuals. Pests typically have a 
high intrinsic rate of reproduction, and so a few individuals in one generation may give rise 
to hundreds or thousands in the next, and resistance spreads very rapidly in a population. 
This problem was often ignored in the past, even though the first case of DDT 
(dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) resistance was reported as early as 1946. There is an 
exponential increase in the numbers of invertebrates that have evolved resistance and in 
the number pesticides against which resistance has evolved. Resistance has been recorded 
in every family of arthropod pests (including dipterans such as mosquitoes and house flies, 
as well as beetles, moths, wasps, fleas, lice and mites) as well as in weeds and plant 
pathogens. Take the Alabama leaf worm, a moth pest of cotton, as an example. It has 
developed resistance in one or more regions of the world to aldrin, DDT, dieldrin, endrin, 
lindane and toxaphene. 
If chemical pesticides brought nothing but problems, - if their use was intrinsically and 
acutely unsustainable – then they would already have fallen out of widespread use. This has 
not happened. Instead, their rate of production has increased rapidly. The ratio of cost to 
benefit for the individual agricultural producer has remained in favour of pesticide use. In 
the USA, insecticides have been estimated to benefit the agricultural products to the tune of 
around $5 for every $1 spent. 
Moreover, in many poorer countries, the prospect of imminent mass starvation, or of an 
epidemic disease, are so frightening that the social and health costs of using pesticides have 
to be ignored. In general the use of pesticides is justified by objective measures such as 
'lives saved', 'economic efficiency of food production' and 'total food produced'. In these 
very fundamental senses, their use may be described as sustainable. In practice, 
sustainability depends on continually developing new pesticides that keep at least one step 
ahead of the pests – pesticides that are less persistent, biodegradable and more accurately 
targeted at the pests. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
19. “The evolution of pesticide resistance is natural selection in action.” What does it 
actually imply? 
a) It is very natural for many organisms to have pesticide resistance. 
b) Pesticide resistance among organisms is a universal phenomenon. 
c) Some individuals in any given population show resistance after the application of 
pesticides 
d) None of the statements a), b) and c) given above is correct. 
Solution: c) 
Option (a) and (b) are incorrect as they are nowhere mentioned in the passage. 
Option (c) is correct because it follows the logic of evolution and natural selection. 
 
 
20. With reference to the passage, consider the following statements: 
1. Use of chemical pesticides has become imperative in all the poor countries of the 
world. 
2. Chemical pesticides should not have any role in sustainable agriculture 
3. One pest can develop resistance to many pesticides 
Which of the statements given above is/are correct? 
a) 1 and 2 only 
b) 3 only 
c) 1 and 3 only 
d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: b) 
Statements 1 and 2 are extreme statements and out of context generalizations. So the 
answer has to be (b). 
Lesson: Avoid out of context (passage) generalizations. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
21. Though the problems associated with the use of chemical pesticides is known for a long 
time, their widespread use has not waned. Why? 
a) Alternatives to chemical pesticides do not exist at all. 
b) New pesticides are not invented at all. 
c) Pesticides are biodegradable. 
d) None of the statements a), b) and c) given above is correct. 
Solution: d) 
The actual answer is there in the last paragraph: “Moreover, in many poorer countries, the 
prospect of imminent mass starvation, or of an epidemic disease, are so frightening that the 
social and health costs of using pesticides have to be ignored. In general the use of pesticides 
is justified by objective measures such as 'lives saved', 'economic efficiency of food 
production' and 'total food produced'.”  
So, none of the options are correct. 
22. How do pesticides act as agents for the selection of resistant individuals in any pest 
population? 
1. It is possible that in a pest population the individuals will behave differently due to 
their genetic makeup. 
2. Pests do possess the ability to detoxify the pesticides. 
3. Evolution of pesticide resistance is equally distributed in pest population. 
Which of the statements given above is/are correct? 
a) 1 only 
b) 1 and 2 only 
c) 3 only 
d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: a) 
Statement 1 has been mentioned clearly in the passage and is the very base on which the 
whole passage stands. Others are not mentioned. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
23. Why is the use of chemical pesticides generally justified by giving the examples of poor 
and developing countries? 
1. Developed countries can afford to do away with use of pesticides by adapting to 
organic farming, but it is imperative for poor and developing countries to use 
chemical pesticides. 
2. In poor and developing countries, the pesticide addresses the problem of epidemic 
diseases of crops and eases the food problem. 
3. The social and health costs of pesticide use are generally ignored in poor and 
developing countries. 
Which of the statements given above is/are correct? 
a) 1 only 
b) 1 and 2 only 
c) 2 only 
d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: c) 
You might feel why is statement 3 wrong? Because it mentions both poor and developing 
countries have to ignore the costs. In the passage, its only poor countries that ignore the 
cost. 
Moreover, statement 1’s first part is out of context generalizations. 
Lesson: Read the statements very carefully and keep cross checking for minute differences 
with the passage. 
 
24. What does the passage imply? 
a) Alternative options to chemical pesticides should be promoted. 
b) Too much use of chemicals is not good for the ecosystem. 
c) There is no scope for the improvement of pesticides and making their use sustainable 
d) Both the statements a) and b) above are correct. 
Solution: a) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
If you observe the other statements, except (a), they are extreme generalizations. Only (a) 
which is also clearly the essential message of the passage, is correct. 
 
 
Passage III 
Today's developing economies use much less energy per capita than developed countries 
such as the United State did at similar incomes, showing the potential for lower-carbon 
growth. Adaptation and mitigation need to be integrated into a climate-smart development 
strategy that increases resilience, reduces the threat of further global warming, and 
improves development outcomes. Adaptation and mitigation measures can advance 
development, and prosperity can raise incomes and foster better institutions. A healthier 
population living in better – built houses and with access to bank loans and social security is 
better equipped to deal with a changing climate and its consequences. Advancing robust, 
resilient development policies that promote adaptation is needed today because changes is 
the climate, already begun, will increase even in the short term. 
The spread of economic prosperity has always been intertwined with adaptation to 
changing ecological conditions. But as growth has altered the environment and as 
environmental change has accelerated, sustaining growth and adaptability demands greater 
capacity to understand our environment, generate new adaptive technologies and practices, 
and diffuse them widely. As economic historians have explained, much of humankind's 
creative potential has directed at adapting to the changing world. But adaptation cannot 
cope with all the impacts related to climate change, especially as larger changes unfold in 
the long term. 
Countries cannot grow out of harm's way fast enough to match the changing climate. And 
some growth strategies, whether driven by the government or the market, can also add to 
vulnerability – particularly if they over exploit natural resources. Under the Soviet 
development plan, irrigated cotton cultivation expanded in water-stressed Central Asia and 
led to the near disappearance of the Aral Sea, threatening the livelihoods of fishermen, 
herders and farmers. And clearing mangroves- the natural coastal buffers against storm 
surges – to make way for intensive farming or housing development, increases the physical 
vulnerability of coastal settlements, whether in Guinea or in Louisiana. 
25. Which of the following conditions of growth can add to vulnerability? 
1. When the growth occurs due to excessive exploitation of mineral resources and 
forests 
2. When the growth brings about a change in humankind's creative potential. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
3. When the growth is envisaged only for providing houses and social security to the 
people. 
4. When the growth occurs due to emphasis on farming only. 
Select the correct Solution: using the codes given below: 
a) 1 only 
b) 2, 3 and 4 only 
c) 1 and 4 only 
d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 
Solution: a) 
In the last paragraph, "overexploitating natural resources" is mentioned as one of the 
factors adding to vulnerability. Statement 2 and 4 mentioned in the passage but not in this 
context. Statement 3 with "social security" is incorrect. So, only statement 1 is correct.  
 
26. What does low-carbon growth imply in the present context? 
1. More emphasis on the use of renewable sources of energy. 
2. Less emphasis on manufacturing sector and more emphasis on agricultural sector. 
3. Switching over from monoculture practices to mixed farming 
4. Less demand for goods and services. 
Select the correct Solution: using the codes given below: 
a) 1 only 
b) 2, 3 and 4 only 
c) 1 and 4 only 
d) None of the above implies low-carbon growth 
Solution: d) 
Renewable energy is generally understood as a strategy for low carbon growth. But it is not 
mentioned in the passage. Instead the passage mentions consuming less energy per capita 
means low carbon growth. 
All other statements are either absurd or out of passage. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
 
27. Which of the following conditions is/are necessary for the sustainable economic growth? 
1. Spreading of economic prosperity more. 
2. Popularizing/spreading of adaptive technologies widely 
3. Investing on research in adaptation and mitigation technologies. 
Select the correct Solution: using the codes given below: 
a) 1 only 
b)2 and 3 only 
c) 1 and 3 only 
d) 1, 2, and 3 
Solution: b) 
Check second paragraph which mentions "But as growth has altered the environment 
....technologies and practices and diffuse them widely." Hence, statements 2 and 3 are 
correct. Answer is (b). 
These are easy to pick. 
 
 
28. Which of the following inferences can be made from the passage? 
1. Rainfed crops should not be cultivated in irrigated areas 
2. Farming under water-deficient areas should not be a part of development strategy. 
Select the correct Solution: using the codes given below: 
a) 1 only 
b) 2 only 
c) Both 1 and 2 
d) Neither 1 nor 2 
Solution: d) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
See again here both the statements are extreme generalizations. The passage mentions only 
a specific case related to both the statements. Hence, both are wrong. 
 
 
29. Consider the following assumptions: 
1. Sustainable economic growth demands the use of creative potential of man. 
2. Intensive agriculture can lead to ecological backlash. 
3. Spread of the economic prosperity can adversely affect the ecology and environment 
With reference to the passage, which of the above assumptions is/are valid? 
a) 1 only 
b) 2 and 3 only 
c) 1 and 3 only 
d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: d) 
“....much of humankind’s creative potential has been directed at adapting to the changing 
world”. For e.g. the passage talks about Soviet development plan – cotton cultivation and 
mangroves of Guinea etc. This shows statement 1 is true. 
Then “for intensive farming or housing development, increases the physical vulnerability of 
coastal settlements, whether in Guinea or in Louisiana”...shows that statement 2 is true. 
Further, paragraph 2 talks about economic prosperity being intertwined with ecological 
conditions. Hence, 3 is also true. 
 
30. Which one of the following statements constitutes the central theme of this passage? 
a) Countries with greater economic prosperity are better equipped to deal with the 
consequences of climate change. 
b) Adaptation and mitigation should be integrated with development strategies 
c) Rapid economic growth should not be pursued by both developed and developing 
economies. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
d) Some countries resort to over exploitation of natural resources for the sake of rapid 
development. 
Solution: b) 
In such questions, you need to read the keyword – “Central Theme” , not observation or 
message etc. So, stick to the keyword. 
Now, option (a) is an observation. Option (c) and (d) are extreme generalizations of specific 
cases mentioned in the passage.  
Option (b) is the theme. 
 
 
Directions for the following 11 questions: 
Read the following three passages and solve the items that follow each passage. Your 
Solutions to these passages should be based on these passages only. 
PASSAGE I 
Invasions of exotic species into new geographical areas sometimes occur naturally without 
human agency. However, human actions have increased this trickle to a flood. Human 
caused introductions may occur either accidently or as a consequence of human transport, 
or intentionally but illegally to serve some private purpose or legitimately to procure some 
hoped-for public benefit by bringing a pest under control, producing new agricultural 
products or providing novel recreational opportunities. Many introduced species are 
assimilated into communities without much obvious effect. However some have been 
responsible for dramatic changes to native species and native communities. For example, 
the accidental introduction of the brown tree snake, Boiga irregularis into Guam, an island 
in the pacific, has through nest predation reduced 10 endemic forest bird species to the 
point of extinction. 
One of the major reasons for the world’s great biodiversity is the occurrence of centres of 
endemism so that similar habitats in different parts of the world are occupied by different 
groups of species that happen it have evolved there. If the species naturally had access to 
everywhere on the globe, we might expect a relatively small number of successful species to 
become dominant in each biome. The extent to which this homogenisation can happen 
naturally is restricted by the limited powers of dispersal of most species in the face of the 
physical barriers that exist to dispersal. By virtue of the transport opportunities offered by 
humans, these barriers have been breached by an ever-increasing number of exotic species. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
The effects of introductions have been to convert a hugely diverse range of local community 
compositions into something much more homogenous. 
It would be wrong, however, to conclude that introducing species to a region will inevitably 
cause a decline in species richness there. For example, there are numerous species of 
plants, invertebrates and vertebrates found in continental Europe but absent from the 
British Isles (many because they have so far failed to recolonize after the last 
glaciations).Their introduction would be likely to augment British biodiversity. The 
significant detrimental effect noted above arises where aggressive species provide a novel 
challenge to endemic biotas ill-equipped to deal with them. 
31. With reference to the passage, which of the following statements is correct? 
a) Introduction of exotic species into new geographical areas always leads to reduced 
biodiversity. 
b) Exotic species introduced by man into new areas have always greatly altered the native 
ecosystems. 
c)Man is the only reason to convert a hugely diverse range of local community compositions 
into more homogenous ones. 
d)None of the statements (a), (b), and (c) is correct in this context. 
Solution: d) 
All three statements are extreme generalizations based on specific references from the 
passage.  For e.g. “However, SOME (introductions) have been responsible for dramatic 
changes in native species.”  
So, avoid all such generalizations. 
 
 
32. Why does man introduce exotic species into new geographical areas? 
1. To bread exotic species with local varieties. 
2. To increase agricultural productivity. 
3. for beautification and landscaping 
Which of the above statements is/are correct? 
a) 1 only 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
b) 2and3only 
c) 1 and 3 only 
d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: d) 
This is answered in the following para : “serve some private purpose or legitimately to 
procure some hoped-for public benefit by bringing a pest under control, producing new 
agricultural products or providing novel recreational opportunities”. 
 
 
33. How is homogenization prevented under natural conditions? 
a) Evolution of groups of species specific to local habitats. 
b)Presence of oceans and mountain ranges 
c)Strong adaptation of groups of specific to local physical and climatic conditions 
d)All the statements (a), (b) and (c) given above are correct in this context. 
Solution: b) 
Homogenization and endemism are different things as per the passage. Options (a) and (c) 
show the reasons for endemism. Only option (b) shows the reasons for the prevention of 
homogenization. 
 
 
34. How have the human beings influenced the biodiversity? 
1. By smuggling live organism 
2. By building highways 
3. By making ecosystems sensitive so that new species are not allowed 
4. By ensuring that new species do not have major impact on local species. 
Which of the statements given above are correct? 
a) 1 and 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
b) 2 and 3 
c) 1 and 3 
d) 2 and 4 
Solution: a) 
As per the first paragraph, “Human-caused introductions may occur either accidentally as a 
consequence of human transport, or intentionally but illegally to serve some private 
purpose.” Hence, point 1- smuggling (illegal) and point 2 – building highways (transport) are 
correct. 
 
 
35. What can be the impact of invasion of exotic species on an ecosystem? 
1. Erosion of endemic species. 
2. Change in the species composition of the community of the ecosystem 
Select the correct Solution: using the codes given below: 
a) 1 only 
b) 2 only 
c) both 1 and 2 
d) neither 1 nor 2 
Solution: c) 
As per the first paragraph invasion of exotic species has led to dramatic changes to native 
species and natural communities. Hence, statement 1 is correct. 
The last few lines of the passage state that the introduction of exotic species has a 
detrimental effect and poses a challenge to endemic biotas ill-equipped to deal with them. 
Hence, S2 is also correct. 
 
PASSAGE II  
Most champions of democracy have been rather reticent in suggesting that democracy 
would itself promote development and enhancement of social welfare – they have tended 
to see them as good but distinctly separate and largely independent goals. The detractors of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
democracy, on the other hand, seemed to have been quite willing to express their diagnosis 
of what they see as serious tensions between democracy and development. The theorists of 
the practical spirit - “Make up your mind: do you want democracy, or instead, do you want 
development?”- often came ,at least to start with , from East Asian countries, and their 
voice grew in influence as several of these countries were immensely successful – through 
the 1970s and 1980s and even later – in promoting economic growth without pursuing 
democracy. 
To deal with these issues we have to pay particular attention to both the content of what 
can be called development and to the interpretation of democracy (in particular to the 
respective roles of voting and of public reasoning). The assessment of development cannot 
be divorced from the lives that people can lead and the real freedom that they enjoy. 
Development can scarcely be seen merely in terms of enhancement of inanimate objects of 
convenience, such as a rise in the GNP (or in personal incomes), or industrialisation – 
important as they may be as means to the real ends. Their value must depend on what they 
do to the lives and freedom of the people involved, which must be central to the idea of 
development. 
If development is understood in a broader way, with a focus on human lives, then it 
becomes immediately clear that the relation between development and democracy has to 
be seen partly in terms of their constitutive connection, rather than only through their 
external links. Even though the question has often been asked whether political freedom is 
“conductive to development”, we must not miss the crucial that political liberties and 
democratic rights are among the “constitutive components” of development does not have 
to be established indirectly through their contribution to the growth of GNP. 
36. According to the passage, why is a serious tension perceived between democracy and 
development by the detractors of democracy? 
a) Democracy and development are distinct and separate goals 
b) Economic growth can be promoted successfully without pursuing a democratic system of 
governance 
c) Non-democratic regimes deliver economic growth faster and far more successfully than 
democratic ones. 
d) All the statements (a), (b) and (c) given above are correct in this context. 
Solution: b) 
You may be confused here. Observe the language of the options carefully before making a 
choice.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
First (a): this is mentioned by champions of democracy, not detractors. So, it is wrong which 
automatically makes (d) also wrong. 
Now, choice is b/w (b) and (c) – while passage denotes that several non-democratic regimes 
in East Asia have delivered growth successfully; it does not say generally that non-
democratic regimes deliver faster growth. Hence, its an extreme generalization. So (c) is 
wrong. 
(b) can be observed from the last lines of the first paragraph.  
  
 
 
37. According to the passage, what should be the ultimate assessment/aim/view of 
development? 
a) Rise in the per capita income and industrial growth rates. 
b) Improvement in the Human Development Index and GNP. 
c) Rise in the savings and consumption trends. 
d) Extent of real freedom that citizens enjoy. 
Solution: d) 
As per the second paragraph, “The assessment of development cannot be divorced from the 
lives that people can lead and the real freedom that they enjoy.” Hence, (d). 
 
 
38. What does a “constitutive” connection between democracy and development imply? 
a) The relation between them has to be seen through external links. 
b) Political and civil rights only can lead to economic development 
c) Political liberties and democratic rights are essential elements of development. 
d) None of the statements (a), (b) and (c) given above is correct in this context. 
Solution: c) 
As per the last paragraph, “….we must not miss the crucial recognition that political liberties 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
and democratic rights are among the ‘constituent components’ of development.” So, 
answer is (c). 
 
 
 
 
PASSAGE III 
The need for Competition Law becomes more evident when foreign direct investment (FDI) 
is liberalised. The impact of FDI is not always pro-competitive. Very often FDI takes the form 
of a foreign corporation acquiring a domestic enterprise or establishing a joint venture with 
one. By making such an acquisition the foreign investor may substantially lessen 
competition and gain a dominant position in the relevant market, thus charging higher 
prices. Another scenario is where the affiliates of two separate multinational companies 
(MNCs) have been established in competition with one another in a particular developing 
economy, following the liberisation of FDI. Subsequently, the parent companies overseas 
merge. With the affiliates no longer remaining independent, competition in the host country 
may be artificially inflated. Most of these adverse consequences of mergers and acquisitions 
by MNCs can be avoided if an effective competition law is in place. Also, an economy that 
has implemented an effective competition law is in a better position to attract FDI than one 
that has not. This is not just because most MNCs are expected to be accustomed to the 
operation of such a law in their home countries and know how to deal with such concerns 
but also that MNCs expect competition authorities to ensure a level playing field between 
domestic and foreign firms. 
39. With reference to the passage, consider the following statements: 
1. It is desirable that the impact of Foreign Direct investment should be pro-competitive. 
2. The entry of foreign investors invariably leads to the inflated prices in domestic markets. 
Which of the statements given above is/are correct? 
a) 1 only 
b) 2 only 
c) Both 1 and 2 
d) Neither 1 nor 2 
Solution: a) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
The author very clearly wants to convey statements 1 by : “The need for Competition Law 
becomes more evident when foreign direct investment (FDI) is liberalised. The impact of FDI 
is not always pro-competitive.” 
Statement 2 is valid only when the parent companies merge overseas. 
 
 
40. According to the passage, how does a foreign investor dominate the relevant domestic 
market? 
1. Multinational companies get accustomed to domestic laws. 
2. Foreign companies establish joint ventures with domestic companies. 
3. Affiliates in a particular market/sector lose their independence as their parent companies 
overseas merge. 
4. Foreign companies lower the cost of their products as compared to that of products of 
domestic companies. 
Which of the statements given above are correct? 
a) 1 and 2 only 
b) 2 and 3 only 
c) 1, 2 and 3 only 
d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 
Solution: b) 
Statement 1 is favourable to competition. 
Statement 4 as been quoted out of the passage. Hence, only 2 and 3 are correct as they 
have been directly stated in the passage. 
 
41. What is the inference from this passage? 
a) Foreign investors and multinational companies always dominate domestic market. 
b) It is not in the best interest of domestic economy to allow mergers company. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
c) With competition law, it is easy to ensure a level playing field between domestic and 
foreign firms. 
d) For countries with open economy Foreign Direct investment is essential for growth. 
 Solution: c) 
Options (a) and (b) are extreme generalizations. 
Option (d) has been quoted out of context. Hence, the answer is (c) which is the essence of 
passage.  
 
 
42. Examine the following statements: 
1) I watch TV only if I am bored 
2) I am never bored when I have my brother’s company. 
3) Whenever I go to the theatre I take my brother along. 
Which one of the following conclusions is valid in the context of the above statements? 
a) If I am bored I watch TV 
b) If I am bored, I seek my brother’s company. 
c) If I am not with my brother, than i'll watch TV. 
d) If I am not bored I do not watch TV. 
 Solution: d) 
This is a typical logic based reasoning. 
To make such questions easier, always draw a logical flow diagram. 
 
Bored 
 
X 
Only then Watch TV 
 
Y etc. 
Here being bored or X or Y is leading to the action “Watch TV”. But if the person is watching 
TV, it does not mean that he was necessarily bored. The cause could have been X or Y or 
anything. So, option (a) is incorrect. But, at the same time, he will not watch TV, if he is note 
bored.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Same diagram can be visualized for the relation between “not being bored” and “being in 
brother’s company “. You will see that his brother’s company is not the only way in which he 
can escape boredom. This tells that (c) is wrong because he may not be bored when he 
doesn’t have his brother’s company.  
 
43. Only six roads A, B, C, P, Q and R connect a military camp to the rest of the country. Only 
one out of A, P, and R are open at any one time. If B is closed so is Q. Only one of A & B is 
open during storms. P is closed during floods. In the context, which one of the following 
statements is correct? 
a) Under normal conditions only three roads are open. 
b) During storms at least one road is open. 
c) During floods only three roads are open 
d) During calamities all roads are closed 
 Solution: b) 
Verify logically for each option.  
Take the first one - In this case, if R is open, then B, C and Q can also be open. 4 roads can be 
open. So its wrong. 
Take the second one - In storm either A or B is open. Hence, it has to be correct. 
Take the third one - P is closed during flooding. Therefore, if A is open then neither of B and 
Q will be open. So, at most two roads can be open. So, This may or may not be true. 
Take the fourth one - From option 2, we know that at least one road is open. Hence, this is 
incorrect.  
In all three given situations - Normal, Storms and Floods, there is no closed condition on 
road C. Hence, (b). 
 
44. Examine the following statements: 
1. None but students are the members of the club. 
2. Some members of the club are married. 
3. All married persons are invited for dance. 
Which one of the conclusions can be drawn from the above statements? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
a) All students are invited for dance 
b) All married students are invited for dance 
c) All members of the club are married person 
d) None of the above conclusions can be drawn 
Solution: d) 
This is a typical syllogism question. Draw Venn diagrams to solve easily or use logic, 
whichever way you feel comfortable.  
In Venn diagrams, sometimes there is more than one possibility. For e.g. here possibility 1 is: 
(that people who dance may not be club members at all) 
 
 
 
Students 
 
 
 
 
Possibility 2: Those who dance can be club members or even married students. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Now, check options individually. 
Option (a) is wrong, because not all students are married, so, cannot be invited for dance. 
Club 
Members 
 
Married 
Dance 
Club 
Members 
Students 
 
Married 
                  
                    Dance 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Option (b) is also wrong, because all married students may not be the member of the club. 
Its true that only students are the members; but it does not mean every student is a club 
member (this is clearly shown in the Venn diagrams). 
Option (c) is wrong because clearly only some are married in the club. 
So, correct option is (d). 
 
 
45. Four political parties W, X, Y and Z decided to set up a joint candidate for the coming 
parliamentary elections. The formula agreed by them was the acceptance of a candidate of 
the most of the parties. For aspiring candidates A, B, C and D approached the parties for 
their ticket. 
A was acceptable to W but not Z 
B was acceptable to Y but not X 
C was acceptable to W and Y 
D was acceptable to W and X 
When candidate B was preferred by W and Z, candidate C was preferred by X and Z and 
candidate A was acceptable to X but not Y: Who got the ticket? 
a) A 
b) B 
c) C 
d) D 
 Solution: c) 
As it is given, A is accepted by W, Z and X. 
B accepted by Y, W and Z. 
C accepted by W, Y, X and Z. 
D accepted by W and X. 
So, C can be accepted by all the four parties. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
46. Consider the following statements: 
1. All X-brand cars parked here are white. 
2. Some of them have radial tyres 
3. All X-brand cars manufactured after 1986 have radial tyres are parked here. 
4. All cars are not X-brand. 
Which one of the following conclusions can be drawn from the above statements? 
a) Only white cars are parked here. 
b) Some white X-brand cars with radial tyres are parked here. 
c) Cars other than X-brand cannot have radial tyres. 
d) Most of the X-brand cars are manufactured before 1986. 
 Solution: b) 
You can draw a Venn diagram or solve logically. But in this case you can just approach 
logically verifying each statement option. 
Take (a): Its wrong because only X-brand cars parked here are white. 
Take (b): All X-brand cars are white and some have radial tyres which means its correct.  
Take (c): Its an out of the league statement.  
Take (d): An illogical and out of the context statement. 
 
47. Consider the following statements: 
The Third World War, if it ever starts will end very quickly with possible end of civilization. It 
is only the misuse of nuclear power which will trigger it. 
Based on the above statement which one of the following inferences is correct? 
a) Nuclear power will be used in Third World War. 
b) There will be no civilization left after the third world war. 
c) The growth of nuclear power will destroy civilization in the long run. 
d) The third world war will not take place. 
Solution: a) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Very clear when its mentioned that only the misuse of nuclear power will trigger world war. 
So nuclear power has to be used in the third world war. 
 
 48. Figures given below are changing with certain rules as we observe them from left to 
right: 
 
According to this rule which of the following would be the next figure if the changes were 
made in the same rule? 
 
Solution: d) 
You need to pick up just the pattern of triangle and you have the answer. See the triangle is 
moving corners anti-clockwise and turning upside down successively. So in the answer 
figure it has to be at the left top and vertical up. Only one option (d) satisfies this condition. 
Learn saving time. You need not solve the full question to arrive at the solution.  
  
49. Consider the following information regarding the performance of class of 1000 students 
in four different tests: 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
If a student scores 74 marks in each of the four tests, in which one of the following tests is 
her performance the best comparatively? 
a) Test I 
b) Test II 
c) Test III 
d) Test IV 
Solution: b) 
If she scores 74 marks, we can assume that this will be her best performance if he scored 74 
marks in a subject which has least highest marks and the least higher range of marks. Test II 
satisfies this best. 
 
50. Six squares are coloured, front and back, red(R), blue(B), yellow (Y), green (G), white 
(W), orange (O) and are hinged together as shown in the figure given below. If they were 
folded to form a cube what would be the face opposite to white face? 
 
a) R 
b) G 
c) B 
d) O 
Solution: c) 
Take G or Y as the base of the cube and start folding the cube to fit adjacent sides. Use your 
imagination a little. Or write these letters in that order on a rubber (cuboid/cube) shape to 
see how the letters will align. 
If you take G as the base, these will be opposite faces: GO, YR, BW. 
Even if you take Y as the base, you will find the same opposite faces. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
  
51. 
 
 
In the above figure, circle P represents hardworking people, circle Q represents intelligent 
people, Circle R represents truthful people and circle S represents honest people. Which 
region represents the people who are intelligent, honest and truthful but not hardworking? 
a) 6 
b) 7 
c) 8 
d) 11 
Solution: a) 
Choose a sector that excludes P, but includes all others Q, R and S. It is 6. 
 
52. Three views of a cube following a particular motion are given below: 
 
What is letter opposite to A? 
a) H 
b) P 
c) B 
d) M 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Solution: a) 
If you observe first two figures, you will know that A, B, H and M are adjacent to K. 
So, letter opposite to A has to be either H or M. 
Now, there are two conditions. One, if M is opposite to A, then H will be opposite to B. But, 
by third figure, we see it is not possible. 
Hence, H has to be opposite to A. 
  
53. 
 
Which one of the figures shown below occupies the blank space(?) in the matrix given 
below? 
 
 
 
 
Solution: d) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
In first and third set, the black portion of middle image is diagonally opposite to that of first 
image. This is the pattern. So, second image in second set must be diagonally opposite to 
the first one. Hence, (d). 
 
 
54. Consider the following statements: 
1. All artists are whimsical. 
2. Some artists are drug addicts. 
3. Frustrated people are prone to become drug addicts. 
From the above three statements it may be concluded that: 
a) Artists are frustrated 
b) Some drug addicts are whimsical 
c) All frustrated people are drug addicts. 
d) Whimsical people are generally frustrated 
Solution: b) 
Again try drawing a Venn diagram.  
S1: If all artists are whimsical, it means that whimsical is a big category (or circle) and all 
artists will be one small circle in that. 
 
 
 
 
 
S2: If some artists are drug addicts, draw a circle that cuts the circle of Drug addicts. Now, 
that circle can either be completely inside whimsical OR outside it cutting it. 
 
 
OR   
 
Whimsical 
 
    Artists 
Whimsical 
 
    Artists 
Drug 
Whimsical 
 
    Artists 
Drug 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
 
S3: If frustrated people MAY become drug addicts (not all), then Frustrated (F) can be a 
smaller circle cutting the drug circle. 
 
 
OR  
  
 
 
Now, check the options.  
Option (a) can be dismissed easily. 
Option (b) has to be correct, because no matter what the drug circle has to cut the 
whimsical circle. 
Option (c) too can be dismissed based on the diagram. 
Option (d) is also wrong, because the diagram does not support it. 
 
 
55. Examine the following statements: 
1. Either A & B are of same age or A is older than B 
2. Either C & D are of same age or D is older than C 
3. B is older than C 
Which of the following conclusions can be drawn from the above statements? 
a. A is older than B 
b. B and D are of the same age 
c. D is older than C 
d. A is older than C 
Solution: d) 
Whimsical 
 
    Artists 
Drug 
Whimsical 
 
    Artists 
Drug 
F 
F 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
From S1: A>=B 
From S2: D>=C 
From S3: B>C 
Now if B (which is either equal or older than A) is greater than C, then A has to be older than 
C. 
  
56. Examine the following statements: 
1. Only those who have a pair of binoculars can become the member of the 
birdwatcher's club. 
2. Some members of the birdwatcher's club have cameras. 
3. Those members who have cameras can take part in photo-contests. 
Which of the following conclusions can be drawn from the above statements? 
a) All those who have a pair of binoculars are members of the birdwatcher's club. 
b) All members of the birdwatcher's club have a pair of binoculars. 
c) All those who take part in photo-contests are members of the birdwatcher's club. 
d) No conclusion can be drawn. 
Solution: b) 
You can use a Venn diagram but use logic, you can solve it quicker.  
See, option 1 and 3 are too general and not necessarily true. But option 2 is a correct 
conclusion as all the club members definitely have a pair of binoculars. 
 
 
57. During the summer vacation Ankit went to a summer camp where he took part in hiking, 
swimming and boating. This summer, he is looking forward to a music camp where he hopes 
to sing, dance and learn to play the guitar. 
Based on the above information four conclusions as given below, have been made. Which 
one of these logically follows from the information given above? 
a) Ankit's parents want him to play guitar. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
b) Ankit prefers music to outdoor activities. 
c) Ankit goes to some type of camp every summer. 
d) Ankit likes to sing and dance 
Solution: d) 
Parents are not even in the picture.  So, no to (a). 
(b) conclusion cannot be made. We can’t compare his likings with the information we have. 
(c) would be too general to say, because we know only about two summer camps that he 
has been to. 
(d) is the choice left which is evident from his joining the camps.   
 
 
58. Three persons A, B & C wear shirts of Black, Blue and Orange colours (not necessarily in 
the order) and pants of green, yellow and orange (not necessarily in that order). No person 
wore shirt and pant of the same colour. Further, it is given that, 
1. A did not wear shirt of black colour. 
2. B did not wear shirt of blue colour. 
3. C did not wear shirt of orange colour. 
4. A did not wear the pants of green colour 
5. B wore pants of orange colour. 
What were the colours of the pants and shirts worn by C respectively? 
a) Orange and black 
b) Green and blue 
c) Yellow and blue 
d) Yellow and black 
Solution: b) 
 
Make a small table from the given data. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
            Shirt  
      
 
 
 
Pant 
A -      Black 
Green 
B -       Blue 
Orange 
C -     Orange 
 Now, from the above information, this can be the deduced table. 
 
Shirt        
 
 
 
  
 
   Pant 
A -      Black   Blue/Orange 
 
 
 
 
Green, Yellow 
B -       Blue    Black/Orange 
 
 
 
 
Orange 
C -     Orange Blue 
 
 
 
 
 
Green 
Answer is green and blue. 
 
59. Ten new TV shows started in January- 5 sitcoms, 3 drama and 2 news magazines. By 
April, only seven of the new shows were still on, five of them being sitcoms. 
Based on the above information, for conclusions, as given below, have been made. Which of 
these logically follows from the information given above? 
a) Only one news magazine show is still going on. 
b) Only one of the drama show is still going on. 
c) At least one discontinued show was a drama. 
d) Viewers prefer sitcoms over drama. 
Solution: c) 
Three shows were discontinued as given. Since no sitcoms shows were discontinued, the 
discontinued ones must be either drama or news magazines. Now, there were only two 
news magazines. So, atleast one discontinued show was a drama. 
 
  
60. Read the passage given below and the two statements that follow (given on the basis of 
the passage): 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Four men are waiting at Delhi airport for Mumbai flight. Two are doctors and other two are 
businessman. Two speak Gujarati and two speak Tamil. No two of the same profession 
speak the same language. Two are Muslims and two are Christians. No two of the same 
religion are of the same profession, nor do they speak same language. The Tamil speaking 
doctor is Christian. 
1. The Christian-Businessman speaks Gujarati. 
2. The Gujarati-speaking doctor is a Muslim. 
Which of the above statements is/are correct conclusion/conclusions? 
a) 1 only 
b) 2 only 
c) Both 1 &2 
d) Neither 1 nor 2 
Solution: C 
Assume these are the 4 people - Doc 1, Doc 2 , Business 1, Business 2 
Now, if Doc 2(Tamil, Christian), then Doc 1 (has to be Muslim, Gujarati) and 
Business 1 has to be (Gujarati, Christian); so Business 2 will be (Muslim, Tamil) 
 
 
61. Consider the following statement: 
“Though quite expensive, television is not a luxury item, as one can learn many things 
through television”. 
Which of the following is the valid inference from the above given statement? 
a) All expensive things are regarded as luxury. 
b) All essential things for learning are not luxury. 
c) Television is essential for learning. 
d) Television is not a luxury item. 
Solution: b) 
Check option (a): Too general. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Option (b): Again a general statement. Although TV is a learning item and not a luxury, even 
then TV is not essential for learning. We cannot infer this option. 
Option (c): Clear from (b) that its wrong. 
Choice has to be (d). 
 
 
62. Mr. Kumar drives to work at an average speed of 48km/hr. The time taken to cover the 
first 60% of the distance is 10 minutes more than the time taken to cover the remaining 
distance. How far is his office? 
a) 30km 
b) 40km 
c) 45km 
d) 48km 
Solution: b) 
Let the distance be N. 
First 60% distance is covered in 10 more minutes more time than that of the rest 40% 
distance 
So, 0.6 x N distance is covered in 10 more minutes more than that of the rest 0.4 x N 
distance 
Which means 0.2 x N is covered in 10 minutes i.e., 1/6 hr 
Hence, Average speed = distance/time = 0.2 x N /(1/6) = 48 
=> x = 48/6 x 0.2 =40 km 
 
 
63. Gita is prettier than Sita but not as pretty as Rita. Then, 
a) Sita is not as pretty as Gita 
b) Sita is prettier than Rita 
c) Rita is not as pretty as Gita 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
d) Gita is prettier than Rita 
Solution: a) 
Simple symbols will get you the answer. 
R> G>S 
Options (b), (c) and (d) are false. 
  
64. Given that, 
1. A is the brother of B 
2. C is the father of A. 
3. D is brother of E. 
4. E is the daughter of B 
Then, the uncle of D is? 
a) A 
b) B 
c) C 
d) E 
Solution: a) 
Draw a family tree diagram and it becomes easy. 
 
C 
 
    (Arrow denotes father/mother – son relationship) 
 
A – B 
 
              
  
 D - E (Dash denotes brothers/sisters) 
 
Uncle of D is A. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
65. Examine the following statements: 
1. Rama scored more than Rani 
2. Rani scored less than Ratna 
3. Ratna scored more than Rama 
4. Padma scored more than Rama but less than Ratna. 
Who scored the highest? 
a) Rama 
b) Padma 
c) Rani 
d) Ratna 
Solution: d) 
Again simple symbols. 
S1: Rama>...... Rani 
S2: Ratna>.....Rani 
S3: Ratna>...>Rama>...Rani 
S4: Ratna>Padma>Rama>Rani 
Ratna scored the highest. 
 
Directions for the following eight items: 
The following eight items (questions 66 to 73) are based on three passages in English to test 
the comprehension of the English language and therefore these items do not have Hindi 
version. Read each item and Solution: the items that follow. 
Passage-1 
For fourteen and half months I lived in my little cell or room in Dehradun jail, and I began to 
feel as if I was almost a part of it. I was familiar with every bit of it, I knew every mark and 
dent on the whitewashed walls and on the uneven floors and on the ceiling with the moth 
eaten rafters. In the little yard outside I greeted little tufts of grass and odd bits of stone as 
old friends. I was not alone in my cell, for several colonies of wasp and hornets lived there, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
and many lizards found the home behind the rafters, emerging in the evening in the search 
of prey. 
66. Which of the following explains best the sentence in the passage “I was almost a part of 
it”? 
a) I was not alone in the cell 
b) I was familiar with every bit of the cell 
c) I greeted little tufts of grass like old friends. 
d) I felt quite at home in the cell 
Solution: b) 
(a) and (c) can not be convincing arguments to explain the question statement. 
Between (b) and (d), you choose (b) because (d) would be extrapolation of what is given in 
the passage. We can understand that the prisoner might have felt like home there, but (b) 
option is more objective, specific and mentioned in the passage. 
  
67. The passage attempts to describe: 
a) The general conditions of the country's jail 
b) The prisoner's capacity to notice the minute details of his surroundings 
c) The prisoner's conscious efforts to overcome the loneliness 
d) The prisoner's ability to live happily with other creatures 
Solution: c) 
(a) is not correct if you read the passage correctly. (b) is one of the elements of the passage, 
not what the passage attempts to describe. (d) would be a subjective view of what has been 
mentioned in the passage. Moreover, there were other things too that the prisoner was 
doing for e.g. noticing the walls. 
So, best choice would be (c). 
  
68. The author of the passage seems to suggest that 
a) It is possible to adjust one-self to uncongenial surroundings. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
b) The conditions in Indian prisons are not bad 
c) It is not difficult to spend one's time in prison 
d) There is a need to improve the conditions in our jails. 
Solution: a) 
The prisoner familiarized himself with his surroundings. He befriended his natural 
environment as a means of survival and to overcome his aloofness. So most appropriate 
option is (a). 
  
Passage-2 
We started pitching the highest camp that has been ever made. Everything took five times 
as long as it would have taken in the place where there was enough air to breathe; but at 
last we got tent up, and when we crawled in, it was not too bad. There was only a light wind 
and inside it was not too cold for us to take off our gloves. At night most climbers take off 
their boots; but I prefer to keep them on. Hilary, on the other hand took his off and lain 
them next to his sleeping bag. 
  
69. What does the expression “pitching the highest camp” imply? 
a) They reached the summit of the highest mountain in the world. 
b) Those who climbed that far earlier did not pitch any camp. 
c) So far nobody climbed that high. 
d) They were too many climbers and needed to pitch a big camp 
Solution: c) 
It can’t be the summit because they are talking about the highest camp that has ever been 
made (by humans). (b) is also inappropriate. And (d) is an absurd statement. 
(c) is the right choice. 
 
  
70. They took a long time to finish the work because: 
a) They were very tired. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
b) There was not enough air to breathe 
c) It was very cold 
d) It was very dark 
Solution: b) 
“Everything took five times as long as it would have taken in a place where there was 
enough air to breathe.” This means that the place didn’t have enough air to breathe. 
  
71. When they crawled into the tent 
a) They took off their gloves because it was not very cold 
b) They could not take off their gloves because it was very cold. 
c) They took of their gloves though it was very cold. 
d) They did not take off their gloves though it was not very cold. 
Solution: a) 
Clear from the passage. 
 
  
Passage-3 
A local man, staying on the top of the floor of an old wooden house, was awakened at 
midnight by fire. Losing his way in the smoke-filled passage, he missed the stairway and 
went into another room. He picked a bundle to protect his face from fire and immediately 
fell through the floor below where he managed to escape through a clear doorway. The 
“bundle” proved to be the baby of the Mayor's wife. The “hero” was congratulated. 
  
72. The man went to another room because 
a) He did not know where the stairway was 
b) The passage was full of smoke 
c) He was extremely nervous 
d) He stumbled on bundle 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Solution: b) 
Clear from the passage as he was unable to see through. 
  
73. The man was called hero because 
a) Expressed his willingness to risk his life to save others 
b) Managed to escape from fire 
c) Showed great courage in fighting the fire. 
d) Saved a life 
Solution: d) 
The bundle that he had used to save face, was the Mayor’s baby, who also got saved in his 
escaping from fire.  
  
Directions for the following 7(seven) items: 
  
Given below are the seven items. Each item describes a situation and is followed by four 
possible responses. Indicate the response that you find most appropriate. Choose only one 
response for each item. The responses will be evaluated based on the level of 
appropriateness for the given situation. 
  
Please attempt all the items. There is no penalty for wrong Solutions for these seven items. 
  
74. You have differences of the opinion regarding the final report prepared by your 
subordinate that is to be submitted urgently. The subordinate is justifying the information 
given in the report. You would 
a) Convince the subordinate that he is wrong 
b) Tell him to reconsider the results 
c) Revise the report on your own 
d) Tell him not to justify the mistake 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Solution: More preferred (c); less preferred (a) 
The question tests your organizational, managerial and administrative skills alongwith 
emotional intelligence. 
Since the report is to be submitted urgently, you don’t have time for the results to be 
reconsidered or to keep arguing with the subordinate. So, best way out is (c), if not then (c). 
B or D will not lead to any results. 
  
75. You are competing with your batch-mate for the prestigious award to be decided based 
on an oral presentation. You have been asked by the committee to finish on time. Your 
friend however, is allowed more than the stipulated time period. 
a) Lodge a complaint to chairperson against the discrimination. 
b) Not listen to any justification from the committee 
c) Ask for withdrawal of your name 
d) Protest and leave the place 
Solution: More preferred (a); less preferred (d). 
This question checks capacity and inclination for justice, and withstanding odd situations. 
Option (b) is a knee-jerk reaction and shows your emotional intelligence in poor light. 
Option (c) shows a lack of interest in fighting for justice. 
Going through option (a), you are going by the official machinery of grievance redressal; 
fighting for justice as well withstanding the odds that will come in the way. 
Option (d) shows the inclination towards fighting for justice, but it is not result-oriented. 
Leaving the place will not help in any way.  
 
76. You are handling a time bound project. During the project review meeting, you find that 
project is likely to get delayed due to lack of cooperation of the team members. You would, 
a) Warn the team members for their non-cooperation 
b) Look into the reasons for non-cooperation 
c) Ask for the replacement of the team members 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
d) Ask for the extension of time citing reasons 
Solution: More preferred (b); less preferred (a) 
 The question too tests your organizational, managerial and administrative skills along with 
emotional intelligence. 
Asking for replacement or extension without looking into reasons or talking to team 
members will be a wrong decision. Moreover, it is a time bound project. So, options (c) and 
(d) are out. 
(a) is preferable because you will at least get the work done. (b) is even more preferable 
because you will get to the core of the issue, and then ensure that the work is completed on 
time. 
 
 
  
77. You are a chairperson of a state sports committee. You have received a complaint and 
later it was found that an athlete in junior age category who has won a medal has crossed 
the age criteria by 5 days. You would... 
a) Ask the screening committee for a clarification 
b) Ask the athlete to return the medal 
c) Ask the athlete to get an affidavit from the court declaring his/her age. 
d) Ask the members of the committee for their views 
Solution: More preferable (a); less preferable (d). 
This question checks your administrative acumen and sense of balance in decision-making. 
Since the investigation in the case is over, asking for clarification from the committee that 
screened the athlete is the best way out. You will get to know if it was a procedural error or 
operational error or an unintended mistake. Then you can take action. Best is (a). 
Or you can even ask the committee for views. This is a more democratic approach since you 
are heading the committee. 
Other options are a little bit on the extreme side and not preferable in this case. The 
reputation of the athlete is also at stake.  
Take a balanced, pragmatic approach. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
  
78. You are handling a priority project and have been meeting all the deadlines and planning 
your leave during the project. Your immediate boss does not grant leave citing the urgency 
of the project. You would... 
a) Proceed on leave without waiting for the sanction 
b) Pretend to be sick and take leave 
c) Approach higher authority to reconsider the leave application. 
d) Tell the boss that it is not justified. 
Solution: More preferable (d); less preferable (c) 
This question checks for balance in decision-making and handling organizational pulls and 
pressures on your personal life. 
(a) and (b) are not right for obvious reasons like dishonesty; disobeying official orders and 
protocols; and irresponsible behaviour. 
(c) can get you the leave, within the official channels, but your relationship with immediate 
boss will be spoiled. He will not like a higher authority overruling him on a matter of leave 
for you, especially when its an urgent project. 
(d) is a more nuanced approach; because its an urgent project (and your leave is not all that 
urgent and important).  
 
 
79. You are involved in setting up a water supply project in remote area. Full recovery of 
cost is impossible in any case. The income levels in the area are low and 25% of the 
population is below poverty line (BPL). When a decision has to be taken on pricing you 
would.... 
a) Recommended that the supply of water be free of charge in all respects 
b) Recommended that the users pay a onetime fixed sum for installation of taps and the 
usage of water be free 
c) Recommended that a fixed monthly charges be levied on the non-BPL families and for BPL 
families water should be free 
d) Recommended that the users pay a charge based on the consumption of water with 
differentiated charges for Non-BPL and BPL families. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Solution: (d) more preferable; (c) less preferable. 
This question checks your administrative acumen; sense of balance in decision-making and 
empathy for the marginalised. 
Option (a) is implausible/impractical. 
Option (b) - fixed installation charges will be difficult for BPL to pay. And later making it free 
for everyone is impractical. 
C or D is a more humane and sympathetic approach  because BPL are getting either water 
free or at a differentiated (lower cost) while others are paying to ensure economic viability. 
D is preferable because otherwise there will be misuse of BPL water. 
  
  
80. As a citizen you have some work with a government department. The official calls you 
again and again; and without directly asking you, sends out feelers for a bribe. You want to 
get your work done. You would... 
a) Give a bribe 
b) Behave as if you have not understood the feelers and persist with your application 
c) Go to the higher officer for help verbally complaining about feelers. 
d) Send in a formal complaint 
Solution: More preferable (c); less preferable (b) 
This checks tolerance for corruption; uprightness; and integrity. 
Sending in a formal complaint will be a wrong step as there is no evidence that the official 
has asked you for a bribe.  
Giving a bribe will ofcourse be wrong. 
Behaving as if you have not understood will be a less preferable option because the official 
has not done it just once. He has been doing it again and again. 
So going to the higher officer for help will be the best approach. Because this way not only 
your case will be quickly resolved, that other official may stop asking future bribes from 
others in fear of action from higer-ups. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
