 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
CSAT – 2013 Solved Paper – 2 
SET-D 
 
Directions for the following 2 (two) items: 
Read the following passage and answer the two items that follow. Your answers to these items 
should be based on the passage only. 
Passage 
Ecological -research over the last quarter of the century has established the deleterious effects of 
habitat fragmentation due to mining, highways and such other intrusions on forests. When a large 
block of forests gets fragmented into smaller bits, the edges of all these bits come into contact with 
human activities resulting in the degradation of the entire forests. Continuity of forested landscapes 
and corridors gets disrupted 'affecting several extinction-prone species of wildlife. Habitat 
fragmentation, is therefore considered as the most serious threat to biodiversity conservation. Ad 
hoc grants of forest lands to mining companies coupled with rampant, illegal mining is aggravating 
this threat. 
1. What is the central focus of this passage? 
(a) Illegal mining in forests  
(b) Extinction of wildlife  
(c) Conservation of nature  
(d) Disruption of habitat 
Solution: d) 
Try getting the essence of the passage, which is: 
“Due to some activities like mining, highways etc, there is disruption in landscapes and corridors. 
This is affecting several species of wild life.” 
Easy to pick. 
 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
2. What is the purpose of maintaining the continuity of forested landscapes and corridors? 
1. Preservation of biodiversity. 
2. Management of mineral resources.  
3. Grant of forest lands for human activities. 
Select the correct answer using the codes given below: 
(a) 1 only  
(b) 1 and 2 
(c) 2 and 3  
(d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: a) 
Pretty straight question. 
 
 
3. In a rare coin collection, there is one gold coin for every three non-gold coins. 10 more gold 
coins are added to the collection and the ratio of gold coins to non-gold coins would be 1: 2. Based 
on the information; the total number of corns in the collection now becomes  
(a) 90  
(b) 80  
(c) 60  
(d) 50 
Solution: a) 
Find the Initial ratio = Gold (G):Non-Gold(N) = 1:3                   .....(i) 
After adding 10 gold coins, the ratio becomes (10+G):N =  1:2   ..... (ii) 
On solving (i) & (ii), you get, G=20 and N=60. 
Therefore, now the total number of coins in the collection = (10+G)+N= 10+20+60=90 
 
 
4. A gardener has 1000 plants: He wants to plant them in such a way that the number of rows and 
the number of columns remains the same. What is the minimum number of plants that he needs 
more for this purpose? 
(a) 14  
(b) 24  
(c) 32  
(d) 34 
Solution: b) 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
If the number of rows and number of columns are to be equal, then the total number of trees should 
be a perfect square. As 1000 is not a perfect square, find a perfect square nearest to 1000. 
It’s 1024, which is square of 32. So he needs to add 24 more trees to get 1024. 
 
 
5. A sum of RS. 700 has to be used to give seven cash prizes to the students of a school for their 
overall academic performance. If each prize is Rs. 20 less than its preceding prize, then what is the 
least value of the prize?  
(a) RS. 30  
(b) RS. 40  
(c) RS. 60  
(d) RS. 80 
Solution: b) 
Let the least value price be X. Then the next value is X+20, and the next value is X+40 and on and on 
up to 7 values. 
It’s nothing but an arithmetic Progression with sum 700. You can do it either manually or using the 
formula of AP. 
Technique 1: (Manually) 
X + X+20 + X+40 +… X+120=700 => 7X+(20+40+…+120)=700 
=> 7X+20(1+2+3+…+6)=700 => 7X+20(21)=700 => 7X=280 =>X=40 
Technique 2: (Using AP Formula) 
Number of prizes = 7 (N). 
So sum till nth term will be: n/2 (2X+ (n-1) x 20) = 700. Put the value of N as 7. 
7/2 (2X + 120) = 700 => X = 40 
 
 
6. Out of 120 applications for a post, 70 are male and 80 have a driver's license. What is the ratio 
between the minimum to maximum number of males having driver's license? 
(a) 1 to 2  
(b) 2 to 3  
(c) 3 to 7  
(d) 5 to 7 
Solution: c) 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Number of females = 120 -70 = 50 
So, a case where minimum number of males have driving license would mean all females have 
driving license. All 50 females have driver’s license. So, only 30 males with license (minimum 
number). 
Now, where maximum number of males will have license, all 70 should have license (only 10 females 
would have license then). 
Ratio: 30/70 = 3 to 7 
 
 
7. In a garrison, there was food for 1000 soldiers for one month. After 10 days, 1000 more soldiers 
joined the garrison. How long would the soldiers be able to carry on with the remaining food? 
(a) 25 days  
(b) 20 days  
(c) 15 days  
(d) 10 days 
Solution: d) 
After 10 days, the remaining food would be sufficient for the 1000 soldiers for 20 more days 
So, If 1000 more soldiers are added, it shall be sufficient for only 10 days (as the no. of soldiers is 
doubled, the days are halved) 
 
 
8. The tank-full petrol in Arun's motor-cycle lasts for 10 days. If he starts using 25% more 
everyday, how many days will the tank-full petrol last?  
(a) 5  
(b) 6  
(c) 7  
(d) 8 
Solution: d) 
Total consumption is say N. So daily consumption is N/10. Now if daily increases by 25%, then totally 
its 1.25N. So, when you divide 10 by 1.25N, it will be N/8. It will go for 8 days. 
  
 
9. A person can walk a certain distance and drive back in six hours. He can also walk both ways in 
10 hours. How much time will he take to drive both ways?  

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
(a) Two hours  
(b) Two and a half hours  
(c) Five and a half hours  
(d) Four hours 
Solution: a) 
2-way walk = 10 hrs, therefore 1-way walk = 5 hrs 
1-way walk + 1-way Drive = 6 hrs; therefore 1-way drive = 6-5= 1 hr 
Hence, 2-way drive = 2 hrs 
 
 
Directions for the following 7 (seven) items: 
Read the following two passages and answer the items that follow each passage. Your answers to 
these items should be based on the passages only. 
Passage -1 
The law in many parts of the world increasingly restricts the discharge of agricultural slurry into 
watercourses. The simplest and often the most economically sound practice returns the material to 
the land as semisolid manure or as sprayed slurry. This dilutes its concentration in the environment 
to what might have occurred III a more primitive and sustainable type of agriculture and converts 
pollutant into fertilizer. Soil microorganisms decompose the organic components of sewage and 
slurry and most of the mineral nutrients become available to be absorbed again by the vegetation. 
The excess input of nutrients, both nitrogen and phosphorus - based, from agricultural runoff (and 
human sewage) has caused many 'healthy' oligotrophic lakes (low nutrient concentrations, low plant 
productivity with abundant water weeds, and clear water) to change to eutrophic condition where 
high nutrient inputs lead to high phytoplankton productivity (sometimes dominated by bloom-
forming toxic species). This makes the water turbid, eliminates large plants and, in the worst 
situations, leads to anoxia and fish kills; so called cultural eutrophication. Thus, important ecosystem 
services are lost, including the provisioning service of wild-caught fish and the cultural services 
associated with recreation. 
The process of cultural eutrophication of lakes has been understood for some time. But only recently 
did scientists notice huge 'dead zones' in the oceans near river outlets, particularly those draining 
large catchment areas such as the Mississippi in North America and the Yangtze in China. The 
nutrient-enriched water flows through streams, rivers and lakes, and eventually to the estuary and 
ocean where the ecological impact may be huge, killing virtually all invertebrates and fish in areas up 
to 70,000 km2 in extent. More than 150 sea areas worldwide are now regularly starved of oxygen as 
a result of decomposition of algal blooms, fuelled particularly by nitrogen from agricultural runoff of 
fertilizers and sewage from large cities. Oceanic dead zones are typically associated with 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
industrialized nations and usually lie off'- 'countries that subsidize their agriculture, encouraging 
farmers to increase productivity and use more fertilizer. 
10. According to the passage, why should the discharge of agricultural slurry into watercourses be 
restricted? 
1. Losing nutrients in this way is not a good practice economically.  
2. Watercourses do not contain the microorganisms that can decompose organic components of 
agricultural slurry.  
3. The discharge may lead to the eutrophication of water bodies.  
Select the correct answer using the codes given below  
(a) 1 only  
(b) 2 and 3 only  
(c) 1 and 3 only  
(d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: d) 
Consider this: “The law in many parts of the world increasingly restricts the discharge of agricultural 
slurry in to water courses. The simplest and most economically sound practice returns the material 
to the land as semisolid manure or as sprayed slurry”. So, these sentences from 1st paragraph hint 
that loosing the nutrients in this way is not a good economical practice. Hence, option 1 is correct. 
Options 2 and 3 are self-evident from 2nd paragraph. 
 
 
11. The passage refers to the conversion of "pollutant to fertilizer". What is pollutant and what is 
fertilizer in this context?  
(a) Decomposed organic component of slurry is pollutant and microorganisms in soil constitute 
fertilizer.  
(b) Discharged agricultural slurry is pollutant and decomposed slurry in soil is fertilizer. 
(c) Sprayed slurry is pollutant and watercourse is fertilizer. 
(d) None of the above expressions is correct in this context. 
Solution: b) 
No-brainer. 
 
12. According to the passage, what are the effects of indiscriminate use of fertilizers? 
1. Addition of pollutants to the soil and water.  
2. Destruction decomposer of microorganisms in soil. 
3. Nutrient enrichment of water bodies.  
4. Creation of algal blooms.  
Select the correct answer from the codes given below: 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
(a) 1, 2 and 3 only  
(b) 1, 3 and 4 only 
(c) 2 arid 4 only  
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 
Solution: b) 
Again a no-brainer. 
 
13. What is/are the characteristics of a water body with cultural eutrophication?  
1. Loss of ecosystem services  
2. Loss of flora and fauna  
3. Loss of mineral nutrients  
Select the correct answer using the code given below  
(a) 1 only  
(b) 1 and 2 only  
(c) 2 and 3 only  
(d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: b) 
The implications of Cultural eutrophication have been discussed in the paragraph with clarity. Just 
underline keywords and key phrases while reading. 
 
14. What is the central theme of this passage?  
(a) Appropriate legislation is essential to protect the environment. 
(b) Modern agriculture is responsible for the destruction of environment.  
(c) Improper waste disposal from agriculture can destroy the aquatic ecosystems.  
(d) Use of chemical fertilizers is undesirable in agriculture. 
Solution: c) 
Just be aware of extreme options like (d). Even though the passage discussed the negative impact of 
the fertilizers, it never says that they be done away with or they are undesirable. If used and 
disposed properly, its useful. 
 
 
Passage - 2 
The miseries of the world cannot be cured by physical help only. Until man's nature changes, his 
physical needs will always arise, and miseries will always be felt, and no amount of physical help will 
remove them completely. The only solution of the problem is to make mankind pure. Ignorance is 
the mother of evil and of all the misery we see. Let men have light, let them be pure and spiritually 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
strong and educated; then alone will misery cease in the world. We may convert every house in the 
country into a charitable asylum, we may fill the land with hospitals, but human misery will continue 
until man's character changes. 
15. According to the passage, which of the following statements is most likely to be true as the 
reason for man's miseries? 
(a) The poor economic and social conditions prevailing in society. 
(b) The refusal on the part of man to change his character.  
(c) The absence of physical and material help from his society.  
(d) Ever increasing physical' needs due to changing social structure. 
Solution: b) 
Quite clear in the last statement. 
 
 
16. With reference to the passage, the following assumptions have been made: 
1. The author gives primary importance to physical and material help in eradicating human misery.  
2. Charitable homes, hospitals, etc. can remove human misery to a great extent. 
Which of the assumptions is/are valid? 
(a) 1 only  
(b) 2 only  
(c) Both 1 and 2  
(d) Neither 1 nor 2 
Solution: d) 
This is a simple passage. Even with one reading, if you have got the essence of the passage, you will 
not make any mistakes. 
 
17. Consider the following figures 1, 2, 3 and 4: 
 
In the figure from 1 to 4 above, two symbols are shown to change their position in a regular 
direction. Following the same sequence, which one of the following will appear at the fifth stage? 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
Solution: b) 
The ‘sun’ is following an anti-clockwise rotation in square figure. The triangle is following a zigzag 
pattern. Pretty simple to grasp. 
 
 
Directions for the following 2 (two) items: 
In each item, there are two sets of figures; first four figures named Problem figures and next four 
figures named Answer figures indicated as (a), (b), (c) and (d). The problem figures follow a particular 
sequence. In accordance with the same, which one of the four answer figures should appear as the 
fifth figure? 
18. Problem figures: 
 
Answer figures: 
 
Solution: c) 
The triangle is rotating clockwise by an angle of 120 degrees. And, the arrow is following a patten of 
up-down in subsequent figures.  
 
 
19. Problem figures: 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
Answer figures: 
 
Solution: b) 
Little tricky. But after observing for some time, you will be able to see the pattern. 
The three segments of each figure ( two Ls and one arrow); are  
 
(i) Moving left 
 
(ii) When they reach the extreme left (first position), they come back again from the other 
 
left (but with an inverted image) 
So, when the arrow in the first figure moves to second figure, it becomes inverted. And until it goes 
again to the extreme left and moves, it would not invert. 
For such problems, good observation power and practice is needed. 
 
 
20. Consider the following diagrams: 
x men, working at constant speed, do a certain job in y days. Which one of these diagrams shows the 
relation between x and y? 
 
(a) diagram I      
(b) diagram II      
(c) diagram III  
(d) diagram IV 
Solution: d)  

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
You can see it diagram wise (Technique 1) or mathematically (Technique 2). 
Diagram I: Even for zero x, there exists some y (i.e. it assumes some value). This means, even if there 
are no men, there exist some working days, which is wrong. 
Diagram II: If x is increased y is also increased. This means if no. of men are increased then the no. of 
working days increased, which is wrong. 
Diagram III: This has two parts in it, a vertical line and a horizontal line. Vertical line suggests infinite 
working days for some number of workers, which is wrong. Horizontal line suggests, same working 
days even if the no of men is increased/decreased which is also wrong. 
Diagram IV: This shows the correct relation i.e. no. of working days reduces as no. Of men are 
increased.  
You can see this in terms of a mathematical equation too (Technique 2): 
Here x and y are inversely related. If x, the number of men increases, then, y, the number of days for 
completing the work decreases. So, mathematically they are inversely proportional. 
=> x multiplied(1/y) => xy = constant  
This is an equation of a rectangular hyperbola which is shown in diagram IV. 
 
 
21. Consider the following matrix: 
3 
370 
7 
2 
224 
6 
1 
730 
X 
What is the number at 'X' in the above matrix? 
(a) 5  
(b) 8  
(c) 9  
(d) 11 
Solution: c) 
If you add all the digits in the central column, you get the addition of the numbers in the first and 
second column.  
For e.g. 3+7+0=10; which is equal to 3+7 = 10 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Same in Second row: 2+2+4 = 8 which is equal to 2+6 = 8 
Same should be in third row: 7+3+0=10 which should be equal to 1+x = 10 => X = 9  
 
 
22. Four cars are hired at the rate of Rs. 6 per km plus the cost of diesel at Rs. 40 a litre. In this 
context, consider the details given in the following table: 
Car 
Mileage (km/l) 
Hours 
Total Payment (Rs.) 
A 
8 
20 
2120 
B 
10 
25 
1950 
C 
9 
24 
2064 
D 
11 
22 
1812 
Which car maintained the maximum average speed? 
(a) Car A  
(b) Car B  
(c) Car C  
(d) Car D 
Solution: a) 
You need to find the total distance travelled by and divide it by total time. To find the distance, first 
form a correct equation that sums up the relation of all variables of each Car – A , B, C , D. 
Let the distance be N. So diesel consumed for car A will be N/8 litres.  
Cost will be (N/8) X 40 = 5N 
Moreover, 6 Rs. needs to paid per km. So additional cost will be 6N 
Total cost = 11N = Rs. 2120 => N = 192.7 Km 
Average speed of Car A = 192.7/20 = Around 9.6 km/hr 
Now, instead of repeating this process for every car, form a general equation: 
Total cost = [(Distance/mileage) x Fuel Cost ] + Distance x per km. Cost ]  
Find distance from here and then average speed. You will get the answer as A. 
 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
23. Examine the following three figures in which the numbers follow a specific pattern: 
 
The missing number (?) in the third figure above is 
(a) 7 
(b) 16 
(c) 21 
(d) 28 
Solution: c) 
Observe the first two figures carefully. You will see this pattern. 
2*(84/12)=14 
2*(81/9)=18 
Hence for the third figure, 2 * (88/11)=X=> X=2*8 => X=16 
 
24. A cube has six numbers marked 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 on its faces. Three views of the cube are 
shown below: 
 
(a) 2 and 3  
(b) 6 and 1  
(c) 1 and 4  
(d) 3 and 1 
Solution: a) 
Technique 1: (Simple drawing) 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
First you can follow a very simple method. Take a rubber (cuboid or cube shape) with you in the 
exam hall. Try writing up the numbers as they have been put in the question figure. You have the 
answer on that rubber in front of you.  
Technique 2: (Logic) 
To see logically, If we check the first two cubes, the common number 1 has numbers 4, 6, 2 and 3 on 
its four adjacent faces. So the remaining number 5 is on the opposite face of 1.      .........Statement 1 
(S1)          
See the 4th cube. Here we need to find two adjacent numbers of 5. 
Method I: 
Looking at it in other way, (from statement 1) it can be said that, 2,3,4 and 6 are the adjacent 
numbers of 5.  So out of all, only (a) is possible. 
Method  II 
If you see statement (1) itself, you can eliminate three answer options.  
- 
Number 1 should not be an adjacent number of 5 because it is the opposite number of 5 
(from statement (1)) . 
- 
 So answer options (b),(c) and (d) can be eliminated as each of these options have 1 as 
one of its two numbers.    
 
 
 
Direction for the following 5 (five) items: 
Study the two figures given below and answer the five items that follow: 
 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
25. How many Physics professors belong to the age group 35 - 44? 
(a) 18  
(b) 16  
(c) 14  
(d) 12 
Solution: b) 
From figure 2, you can see that 40% of Physics professors belong to the age group 35-44. From figure 
1, we can find that there are 32 male and 8 female Physics professors.  
Totally there are 40 Physics professors - out of which 40% belong to 35-44 age group. 
40% of 40 will be 16 – answer. 
 
26. Which one of the following disciplines has the highest ratio of males to females? 
(a) Physics  
(b) Mathematics 
(c) Chemistry 
(d) Economics 
Solution: a) 
Simple mathematics. Just take the concerned ratios.  
 
27. What percentage of all Psychology professors are females? 
(a) 40%  
(b) 50%  
(c) 60%  
(d) 70% 
Solution: c) 
There are 4 male and 6 female Psychology professors - totally 10 Psychology professors. 
There are 6 female professors out of all Psychology professors. So, (6/10) X 100 = 60% 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
28. If the number of female Physics professors in the age group 25 - 34 equals 25% of all the 
Physics professors in that age group, then what is the number of male Physics professors in the 
age group 25 - 34? 
(a) 9 
(b) 6 
(c) 3 
(d) 2 
Solution: a) 
Look at figure2 - 30% of Physics professors belong to the age group 25-34.  Then from figure1, we 
know there are 32 male and 8 female Physics professors.  
So, totally 40 Physics professors, out of that 30% belong to 25-34 age group. 
So there are 12 (30% of 40) Physics professors in the age group 25-34              ......S1 
Further its given that the number of female Physics professors in the age group 25 - 34 equals 25% 
of all the Physics professors in that age group, so, 25% of 12 i.e. 3 are female professors in that age 
group ..........................S2 
From S1 and S2:    12-3=9  male professors belong to 25-34 age group. 
 
29. If the Psychology professors in the University constitute 2% of all the professors in the 
University, then what is the number of professors in the University? 
(a) 400  
(b) 500  
(c) 600  
(d) 700 
Solution: b) 
Simple arithmetic. 
 
30. Consider the following figures: 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
Which one of the following figures would logically come in the 7th position indicated above by a 
question mark? 
 
Solution: d) 
The pattern is: Outer arrows - first clockwise, then anti-clock wise, then two facing each other, with 
the below one in the anti-clockwise direction. Inner circle and square change alternatively. Follow 
this and you have the answer. 
 
Directions for the following 8 (eight) items: 
Read the following four passages and answer the items that follow each passage. Your answers to 
these items should be based on the passages only. 
Passage -1 
The subject of democracy has become severely muddled because of the way the rhetoric 
surrounding it has been used in recent years, There is, increasingly, an oddly confused dichotomy 
between those who want to 'impose' democracy on countries In the non-Western world (in these 
countries' 'own interest', of course) and those who are opposed to such 'imposition' (because of the 
respect for the countries' 'own ways'). But the entire language of 'imposition', used by both sides, is 
extraordinarily inappropriate since it makes the implicit assumption that democracy belongs 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
exclusively to the West, taking it to be a quintessentially 'Western' idea which has originated and 
flourished only in the West. 
But the thesis and the pessimism it generates about the possibility of democratic practice in the 
world would be extremely hard to justify. There were several experiments in local democracy in 
ancient India. Indeed, in understanding the roots of democracy in the world, we have to take an 
interest in the history of people participation and public reasoning in different parts of the world. 
We have to look beyond thinking of democracy only in terms of European and American evolution. 
We would fail to understand the pervasive demands for participatory living, on which Aristotle spoke 
with far-reaching insight, if we take democracy to be a kind of a specialized cultural product of the 
West. 
It cannot, of course, be doubted that the institutional structure of the contemporary practice of 
democracy is largely the product of European and American experience over the last few centuries. 
This is extremely important to recognize since these developments in institutional formats were 
immensely innovative and ultimately effective. There can be little doubt that there is a major 
'Western' achievement here. 
31. Which of the following is closest to the view of democracy as mentioned in the above passage? 
a) The subject of democracy is a muddle due to a desire to portray it as a Western concept, 'alien' to 
non-Western countries.  
b) The language or imposition of democracy is inappropriate. There is, however, a need to consider 
this concept in the backdrop of culture of 'own ways' of non-Western society.  
c) While democracy is not essentially a Western idea belonging exclusively to the West, the 
institutional structure of current democratic practices has been their contribution.  
d) None of the statements (a), (b) and (c) given above is correct. 
Solution: c) 
This is quite clear from the passage. 
 
32. With reference to the passage, the following assumptions have been made: 
1. Many of the non-Western countries are unable to have democracy because they take democracy 
to be a specialized cultural product of the West.  
2. Western countries are always trying to impose democracy on non-Western countries. 
Which of the above is/are valid assumption/assumptions? 
a) 1 only  
b) 2 only  
c) Both 1 and 2  
d) Neither 1 nor 2 
Solution: d) 
Be a little careful when dealing with such extreme statements. Statement 1 is ofcourse false. But 
Statement 2: if you had done a superficial reading of the passage, you may make a mistake. If you 
read carefully that “those who want to 'impose' democracy on countries In the non-Western world (in 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
these countries' 'own interest', of course”....who are ‘those’ has not been mentioned? So, it may or 
may not be the West. Moreover, the word ‘Always’ : just keep such words in mind while solving 
passages.  
 
Passage - 2 
Corporate governance is based on principles such as conducting the business with all integrity and 
fairness, being transparent with regard to all transactions, making all the necessary disclosures and 
decisions, complying with all the laws of the land, accountability and responsibility towards the 
stakeholders and commitment to conducting business in an ethical manner. Another point which is 
highlighted on corporate governance is the need for those in control to be able to distinguish 
between what are personal and corporate funds while managing a company. 
Fundamentally, there is a level of confidence that is associated with a company that is known to 
have good corporate governance. The presence of an active group of independent directors on the 
board contributes a great deal towards ensuring confidence in the market. Corporate governance is 
known to be one of the criteria that foreign institutional investors are increasingly depending on 
when deciding on which companies to invest in. It is also known to have a positive influence on the 
share price of the company. Having a clean image on the corporate governance front could also 
make it easier for companies to source capital at more reasonable costs. Unfortunately, corporate 
governance often becomes the centre of discussion only after the exposure of a large scam. 
33. According to the passage, which of the following should be the practice/practices in good 
corporate governance? 
1. Companies should always comply with labour and tax laws of the land.  
2. Every company in the country should have a government 'representative as one of the 
independent directors on the board to ensure transparency.  
3. The manager of a company should never invest his personal, funds in the company.  
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:  
a) 1 only  
b) 2 and 3 only  
c) 1 and 3 only  
d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: c) 
Very clear from the passage. 
 
34. According to the passage, which of the following is/are the major benefit/benefits of good 
corporate governance?  
1. Good corporate governance leads to increase in share price of the company.  
2. A company with good corporate governance always increases its business turnover rapidly.  
3. Good corporate governance is the main criterion for foreign institutional investors when they 
decide to buy a company.  

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Select the correct answer using the codes given below: 
a) 1 only  
b) 2 and 3 only  
c) 1 and 3 only  
d) 1, 2 and 3 
Solution: a) 
In statement 3, the word “main” is an extreme word and you need to be careful while picking. 
 
 
Passage - 3 
Malnutrition most commonly occurs between the ages of six months and two years. This happens 
despite the child's food requirements being less than that of an older child. Malnutrition is often 
attributed to poverty, but it has been found that even in households where adults eat adequate 
quantities of food, more than 50 per cent of children-under-five do not consume enough food. The 
child's dependence on someone else to feed him/her is primarily responsible for the malnutrition. 
Very often the mother is working and the responsibility of feeding the young child is left to an older 
sibling. It is therefore crucial to increase awareness regarding the child's food needs and how to 
satisfy them. 
35. According to the passage, malnutrition in children can be reduced  
a) if the children have regular intake of food.  
b) after they cross the age of five.  
c) if the food needs of younger children are known.  
d) if the responsibility of feeding younger children is given to adults. 
Solution: c) 
There is a catch in option (a) – regular does not mean ‘enough’ and ‘adequate’. So it is not the most 
appropriate answer. 
Option (d) could have been the answer if option (c) was not there, because (c) is more appropriate. 
The passage talks primarily about raising awareness about child’s actual food needs; and then any 
one can satisfy them. 
 
 
36. According to the author, poverty is not the main cause of malnutrition, but the fact that  
1. taking care of younger ones is not a priority for working mothers.  
2. awareness of nutritional needs is not propagated by the Public Health authorities.  
Select the correct answer using the code given below:  
a) 1 only  

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
b) 2 only  
c) Both 1 and 2  
d) Neither 1 nor 2 
Solution: d) 
Both are extreme statements. You can avoid both. 
“Taking care” and “leaving older siblings to feed the child” are two different things. Nowhere its 
written that the mother does not prioritize child’s health. 
Public authorities and their role, limitations etc. are not mentioned in the passage. So avoid this.  
 
Passage - 4 
A number of empirical studies find that farmers are risk-averse, though only moderately in many 
cases. There is also evidence to show that farmers' risk aversion results in cropping patterns and 
input use designed to reduce risk rather than to maximize income. Farmers adopt a number of 
strategies to manage and cope with agricultural risks. These include practices like crop and field 
diversification, non-farm employment, storage of stocks and strategic migration of family members. 
There are also institutions ranging from share tenancy to kinship, extended family and informal 
credit agencies. One major obstacle to risk sharing by farmers is that the same type of risks can 
affect a large number of farmers in the region. Empirical studies show that the traditional methods 
are not adequate. Hence there is a need for policy interventions, especially measures that cut across 
geographical regions. 
Policies may aim at tackling agricultural risks directly or indirectly. Examples of risk-specific policies 
arc crop insurance, price stabilization and the development of varieties resistant to pests and 
diseases. Policies which affect risk indirectly are irrigation, subsidized credit and access to 
information. No single risk-specific policy is sufficient to reduce risk and is without side-effects, 
whereas policies not specific to risk influence the general situation and affect risks only indirectly. 
Crop insurance, as a policy measure to tackle agricultural risk directly, deserves careful consideration 
in the Indian context and in many other developing countries because the majority of farmers 
depend on rain-fed agriculture and in many areas yield variability is the predominant cause of their 
income instability. 
37. The need for policy intervention to mitigate risks in agriculture is because  
a) farmers are extremely risk-averse.  
b) farmers do not know how to mitigate risks.  
c) the methods adopted by farmers and existing risk sharing institutions are not adequate.  
d) majority of farmers depend on rain-fed agriculture. 
Solution: c) 
Clear from the last lines of the 1st paragraph. 
 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
38. Which of the following observations emerges from the above passage?  
a) One can identify a single policy that can reduce risk without any side-effect.  
b) No single risk-specific policy is sufficient to reduce agricultural risk.  
c) Policies which affect risk indirectly can eliminate it.  
d) Government's policy intervention can mitigate agricultural risk completely. 
Solution: b) 
Again clear from the passage. Just read it carefully, you will be able to answer. 
 
 
39. Consider the following statements:  
 
I. A primary group is relatively smaller in size.  
 
II. Intimacy is an essential characteristic of a primary group.  
 
III. A family may be an example of a primary group. 
In the light of the above statements, which one of the following is true? 
a) All families are primary groups.  
b) All primary groups are families.  
c) A group of smaller size is always a primary group.  
d) Members of a primary group know each other intimately. 
Solution: d) 
Statement 3 says family may be an example (not necessarily) a primary group. So, (a) is wrong. 
Similarily by critical reasoning you can eliminate options (b) and (c). 
 
 
40. Four friends, A, B, C and D distribute some money among themselves in such a manner that A 
gets one less than B, C gets 5 more than D, D gets 3 more than B. Who gets the smallest amount?  
a) A  
b) B  
c) C  
d) D 
Solution: a) 
S1 – A= B-1 
S2 – C=D+5 
S3 – D = B+3 
So, C> D >B> A 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
Directions for the following 4 (four) items: 
Read the following statements and answer the four items that follow: 
Five cities P, Q, R, S and T are connected by different modes of transport as follows: 
P and Q are connected by boat as well as rail.  
Sand R are connected by bus and boat.  
Q and T are connected by air only.  
P and R are connected by boat only.  
T and R are connected by rail and bus. 
41. Which mode of transport would help one to reach R starting from Q, but without changing the 
mode of transport?  
a) Boat  
b) Rail  
c) Bus  
d) Air 
Solution: a) 
 
Its a problem which can be solved best using a diagram. 
                                   P----boat/rail----Q------Air----T 
 
 
Boat 
 
 
 
                   Rail/Bus 
 
 
      R -------boat/bus ---S 
 
Solution will be boat. Clear from the diagram. 
  
42. If a person visits each of the places starting from P and gets back to P, which of the following 
places must he visit twice?  
a) Q  
b) R  
c) S  
d) T 
Solution: b) 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Because the node at R leads to S from where there is no other way. So, one has to return to R in any 
possible way. 
 
43. Which one of the following pairs of cities is connected by any of the routes directly without 
going to any other city?  
a) P and T  
b) T and S  
c) Q and R  
d) None of these 
Solution: d) 
Clear from the diagram. 
 
44. Between which two cities among the pairs of cities given below are there maximum travel 
options available?  
a) Q and S  
b) P and R  
c) P and T  
d) Q and R 
Solution: b) 
Clear from the diagram. It will be bus, rail, boat, air – all. 
 
Directions for the following 3 (three) items: 
Read the following passage and answer the three items that follow: 
A tennis coach is trying to put together a team of four players for the forthcoming tournament. For 
this 7 players are available: males A, Band C; and females W, X, Y and Z. All players have equal 
capability and at least 2 males will be there in the team. For a team of four, all players must be able 
to play with each other. But, B cannot play with W, C cannot play with Z and W cannot play with Y. 
45. If Y is selected and B is rejected, the team will consist of which one of the following groups?  
a) A, C, Wand Y  
b) A, C, X and Y  
c) A, C, Y and Z  
d) A, W, Y and Z 
Solution: b) 
If Y is selected, W will not be selected. So, options (a) and (d) are wrong. As C cannot play with Z, 
option (c) is also wrong. 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
46. If B is selected and Y is rejected, the team will consist of which one of the following groups?  
a) A, B, C and W  
b) A, B, C and Z  
c) A, B, C and X  
d) A, W, Y and Z 
Solution: c) 
If B is selected, W will not be selected. So options (a) and (d) are wrong. As C cannot play with Z, 
option (b) is also wrong. 
 
47. If all the three males' are selected, then how many combinations of four member teams are 
possible?  
a) 1  
b) 2  
c) 3  
d) 4 
Solution: b) 
If male A, B, C are selected, then one more person is needed to make up a four member team. 
Since B is selected, W cannot be selected and as C is selected, Z cannot be selected. So the either X 
or Y has to be chosen.  
(A,B,C,X) or (A,B,C,Y) . So these two only can be formed. 
 
 
48. The music director of a film wants to select four persons to work on "different aspects of the 
composition of a piece of music. Seven persons are available for this work; they are Rohit, Tanya, 
Shobha, Kaushal, Kunal, Mukesh and J aswant. Rohit and Tanya will not work together. Kunal and 
Shobha 
will 
not 
work 
together. 
Mukesh 
and 
Kunal 
want 
to 
work 
together.  
 
Which of the following is the most acceptable group .of people that can be selected by the music 
director?  
a) Rohit, Shobha, Kunal and Kaushal  
b) Tanya, Kaushal, Shobha and Rohit  
c) Tanya, Mukesh, Kunal and Jaswant  
d) Shobha, Tanya, Rohit and Mukesh 
Solution: c) 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Option (a) is not possible as Shobha and Kunal will not work together 
Option (b) is not possible as Rohit and Tanya will not work together 
Option (d) is not possible as Rohit and Tanya will not work together                      
Hence, option (c) 
 
49. Five people A, B, C, D and E are, seated about a round table, Every chair is spaced equidistant 
from adjacent chairs,  
I. C is seated next to A.  
II. A is seated two seats from D.  
III. B is not seated next to A.  
Which of the following must be true?  
I. D is seated next to B.  
II. E is seated next to A.  
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:  
a) I only  
b) II only  
c) Both I and II  
d) Neither I nor II 
Solution: c) 
Easiest way is to draw a circle. 
These are the two possibilities: 
CAEDB (or) ACBDE 
C 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
      C                                         E                  OR  
 A 
B 
 
 
 
B 
 
D 
E 
D 
 
In both the cases, D is placed next to B. And this is true for A and E. 
 
 
Directions for the following 3 (three) items: 
Examine carefully the following statements and answer the three items that follow: 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Out of four friends A, B, C and D,  
A and B play football and cricket,  
Band C play cricket and hockey,  
A and D play basketball and football,  
C and D play hockey and basketball. 
50. Who does not play hockey?  
a) D  
b) C  
c) B  
d) A 
Solution: d) 
Clear from the statements. 
 
51. Who plays football, basketball and hockey?  
a) D  
b) C  
c) B  
d) A 
Solution: c) 
Simple enough. 
 
52. Which game do B, C and D play?  
a) Basketball  
b) Hockey  
c) Cricket  
d) Football 
Solution: b) 
 
53. Geeta is older than her cousin Meena, Meena's brother Bipin is older than Geeta. When 
Meena and Bipin visit Geeta, they like to play chess. Meena wins the game more often than Geeta. 
Based on the above information, four conclusions, as given below, have been made. Which one of 
these logically follows from the information given above? 
a) While playing chess with Geeta and Meena, Bipin often loses.  
b) Geeta is the oldest among the three.  
c) Geeta hates to 10 the game.  
d) Meena is the youngest of the three. 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Solution: d)  
Geeta is older than her cousin Meena => G > M 
Meena's brother Bipin is older than Geeta => B > G 
Therefore, B > G > M 
 
Directions for the following 4 (four) items: 
Read the following passage and answer the four items that follow. YOUR' answers to these items 
should be based on the passage only. 
Passage 
Financial markets in India have acquired greater depth and liquidity over the years. Steady reforms 
since 1991 have led to growing linkages and integration of the Indian economy and its financial 
system with the global economy. Weak global economic prospects and continuing uncertainties the 
in international financial markets therefore, have had their impact on the emerging market 
economies. Sovereign risk concerns, particularly in the Euro area, affected financial markets for the 
greater part of the year, with the contagion of Greece's sovereign debt problem spreading to India 
and other economies by way of higher-than-normal levels of volatility. 
The funding constraints in international financial markets could impact both the availability and cost 
of foreign funding for banks and corporates. Since the Indian financial system is bank dominated, 
banks' ability to withstand stress is critical to overall financial stability. Indian banks, however, 
remain robust, notwithstanding a decline in capital to risk-weighted assets ratio and a rise in non-
performing asset levels in the recent past. Capital adequacy levels remain above the regulatory 
requirements. The financial market infrastructure continues to function without any major 
disruption. With further globalization, consolidation, deregulation, and diversification of the financial 
system, the banking business may become more complex and riskier. Issues like risk and liquidity 
management and enhancing skill therefore assume greater significance. 
54. According to the passage, the financial markets in the emerging market economies including 
India had the adverse impact in recent years due to  
1. weak global economic prospects.  
2. uncertainties in the international financial markets.  
3. sovereign risk concerns in the Euro area.  
4. bad monsoons and the resultant crop loss.  
Select the correct answer using the code given below:  
a) 1 and 2 only  
b) 1, 2 and 3  
c) 2 and 3 only  
d) 2, 3 and 4 
Solution: b) 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Statement 4 is nowhere mentioned in the passage. 
 
55. The Indian financial markets are affected by global changes mainly due to the  
a) increased inflow of remittances from abroad.  
b) enormous increase in the foreign exchange reserves.  
c) growing global linkages and integration of the Indian financial markets.  
d) contagion of Greece's sovereign debt problem. 
Solution: c) 
This is the very theme of the passage. 
 
56. According to the passage, in the Indian financial system, banks' ability to with stand stress is 
critical to ensure overall financial stability because Indian financial system is  
a) controlled by the Government of India.  
b) less integrated with banks.  
c) controlled by Reserve Bank of India.  
d) dominated by banks. 
Solution: d) 
Very explicitly mentioned in the passage. 
 
57. Risk and liquidity management assumes more importance in the Indian banking system in 
future due to  
1. further globalization.  
2. more consolidation and deregulation of the financial system.  
3. further diversification of the financial system.  
4. more financial inclusion in the economy.  
Select the correct answer using the code given below:  
a) 1, 2 and 3  
b) 2, 3 and 4  
c) 1 and 2 only  
d) 3 and 4 only 
Solution: a) 
Statement 4 is not mentioned in the passage. 
 
 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
58. There are five hobby clubs in a college viz, photography, yachting, chess, electronics and 
gardening. The gardening group meets every second day, the electronics group meets every third 
day, the chess group meets every fourth day, the yachting group meets every fifth day and the 
photography group meets every sixth day. How many times do all the five groups meet on the 
same day within 180 days? 
a) 3 
b) 5 
c) 10 
d) 18 
Solution: a) 
Take the LCM of 2,3,4,5 and 6. You get 60 i.e. all the groups meet on the same day on every 60th day. 
Hence, only three times. 
 
59. A, B, C, D and E belong to five different cities P, Q, R, Sand T (not necessarily in that order). 
Each one of them comes from a different city. Further it is given that:  
1. B and C do not belong to Q.  
2. B and E do not belong to P and R.  
3. A and C do not belong to R, Sand T.  
4. D and E do not belong to Q and T.  
Which one of the following statements is not correct?  
a) C belongs to P  
b) D belongs to R  
c) A belongs to Q  
d) B belongs to S 
Solution: d) 
From the statements you can construct the following and then figure out what belongs to what. 
Q –  B, C, D, E      A 
P –  B, E              C 
R – B, E, A, C     D 
S – A, C              E 
T- A, C, D, E      B 
 
 
60. Seven men, A, B, C, D, E, F and G are standing in a queue in that order. Each one is wearing a 
cap of a different colour like violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red. D is able to see in 
front of him green and blue, but not violet. E can see violet and yellow, but not red. G can see caps 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
of all colours other than orange. If E is wearing an indigo coloured cap, then the colour of the cap 
worn by F is  
a) Blue  
b) Violet  
c) Red  
d) Orange 
Solution: c) 
You can construct the following table from the statements. 
Person 
Cap 
A/B/C 
green/blue/yellow 
D 
violet 
E 
indigo 
G 
orange 
 
So F is wearing red cap. 
 
61. There are some balls of red, green and yellow colour lying on a table. There are as many red 
balls as there are yellow balls. There are twice as many yellow balls as there are green ones. The 
number of red balls  
a) is equal to the sum of yellow and green balls.  
b) is double the number of green balls.  
c) is equal to yellow balls minus green balls.  
d) cannot be ascertained. 
Solution: b) 
Simple arithmetic. R=Y= 2G 
 
 
Directions for the following 2 (two) items: 
Read the following passage and answer the two items that follow. Your answers to these items 
should be based on the passage only. 
Passage 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
Crude mineral oil comes out of the earth as a thick brown or black liquid with a strong smell. It is a 
complex mixture of many different substances, each with its own individual qualities. Most of them 
are combinations of hydrogen and carbon in varying proportions. Such hydrocarbons are also found 
in other forms such as bitumen, asphalt and natural gas. Mineral oil originates from the carcasses of 
tiny animals and from plants that live in the sea. Over millions of years, these dead creatures form 
large deposits under the sea-bed; and ocean currents cover them with a blanket of sand and silt. As 
this mineral hardens, it becomes sedimentary rock and effectively shuts out the oxygen, so 
preventing the complete decomposition of the marine deposits underneath. The layers of 
sedimentary rock become thicker and heavier. Their pressure produces heat, which transforms the 
tiny carcasses into crude oil in a process that is still going on today. 
62. Mineral oil deposits under the sea do not get completely decomposed because they  
a) are constantly washed by the ocean currents.  
b) become rock and prevent oxygen from entering them.  
c) contain a mixture 'of hydrogen and carbon.  
d) are carcasses of organisms lying in saline conditions. 
Solution: b) 
Clearly mentioned. 
 
63. Sedimentary rock leads to the formation of oil deposits because  
a) there are no saline conditions below it.  
b) it allows some dissolved oxygen to enter the dead organic matter below it.  
c) weight of overlying sediment layers causes the production of heat.  
d) it contains the substances that catalyze the chemical reactions required to change dead organisms 
into oil. 
Solution: c) 
Very explicit in the passage. 
 
64. In a class of 45 students, a boy is ranked 20th. When two boys joined, his rank was dropped by 
one. What is his new rank from the end?  
a) 25th  
b) 26th  
c) 27th  
d) 28th 
Solution: c) 
Initial Condition = 19 guys – The Boy (20th Rank) – 25 other guys 
Now = 20 guys – The Boy – 26 other guys (Since his rank has shifted by one, one guy should be ahead 
and one behind) 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
So, his rank from end is 27th. 
  
 
65. A thief running at 8 km/hr is chased by a policeman whose speed is 10 km/hr. If the thief is 100 
m ahead of the policeman, then the time required for the policeman to catch the thief will be  
a) 2 min  
b) 3 min  
c) 4 min  
d) 6 min 
Solution:  
Use relative speed concept. Relative speed of policeman w.r.t the thief is 2 Km/hr (10-8).  
His Speed in m/min will be (2 X1000)/60 = 100/3   m/min 
He has to cover 100 m. So time needed is 3 mins. 
 
 
66. A train travels at a certain average speed for a distance of 63 km and then travels a distance of 
72 km at an average speed of 6 km/hr more than its original speed. If it takes 3 hours to complete 
the total journey, what is the original speed of the train in km/hr?  
a) 24  
b) 33  
c) 42  
d) 66 
Solution: c) 
Let the original speed be ‘S’. 
Total time taken = 3 hr => 63/S + 72/S+6 = 3 
You can solve the question easily if you just do an option check. Otherwise the long way is to solve 
the equation completely. Save time. 
As we have 63 in the numerator, we can assume that S may be a multiple of 7.  The only option 
available is 4. So, let us try with that. 
63/42 + 72/48 = 3/2 + 3/2 = 3 
You have the answer. 
 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
 
Directions for the following 8 (eight), items: 
The following eight items (items 67 to 74) are based on three passages in English to test the 
comprehension of English language and therefore these items do not have Hindi version. Read each 
passage and answer the items that follow. 
English Passage - 1 
Seven-year-old Jim came home from the park without his new bicycle. "An old man and a little boy 
borrowed it," he explained. "They are going to bring it back at four o'clock." His parents were upset 
that he had given his expensive new bicycle, but were secretly proud of his kindness and faith. Came 
four o'clock, no bicycle. The parents were anxious. But at 4:30, the door bell rang, and there stood a 
happy man and a boy, with the bicycle and a box of chocolates. Jim suddenly disappeared into his 
bedroom, and then came running out. "All right," he said, after examining the bicycle. ''You can have 
your watch back!" 
67. When Jim came home without his bicycle, his parents  
a) were angry with him.  
b) were worried. 
c) did not feel concerned.  
d) were eager to meet the old man and the little boy. 
Solution: b) 
Anger would be an extreme word. So B, not A. 
 
68. Jim returned the watch to the old man and the little boy because     
a) they gave him chocolates.  
b) his father was proud of him.  
c) he was satisfied with the condition of his bicycle.  
d) they were late only by 30 minutes. 
Solution: c) 
The statement “All right” after examining the bicycle points to option C. 
 
English Passage - 2 
It was already late when we set out for the next town, which according to the map was about fifteen 
kilometres away on the other side of the hills. There we felt that we would find a bed for the night. 
Darkness fell soon after we left the village, but luckily we met no one as we drove swiftly along the 
narrow winding road that led to the hills. As we climbed higher, it became colder and rain began to 
fall, making it difficult at times to see the road. I asked John, my companion, to drive more slowly. 
After we had travelled for about twenty kilometres, there was still no sign of the town which was 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
marked on the map. We were beginning to get worried. Then without warning, the car stopped and 
we found we had run out of petrol. 
69. The author asked John to drive more slowly because  
a) the road led to the hills.  
b) John was an inexperienced driver.  
c) the road was not clearly visible.  
d) they were in wilderness. 
Solution: c) 
Clear from passage. 
 
70. The travellers set out for the town although it was getting dark because  
a) they were in a hurry.  
b) the next town was a short distance away and was a hill-resort.  
c) they were in wilderness.  
d) the next town was a short distance away and promised a good rest for the night. 
Solution: d) 
Can be inferred easily from the passage. 
 
71. The travellers were worried after twenty kilo metres because  
a) it was a lonely countryside.  
b) they probably feared of having lost their way.  
c) the rain began to fall 
d) it was getting colder as they drove. 
Solution: b) 
Since the place mentioned in the map was not found, they thought they had lost the way. 
 
English Passage - 3 
A stout old lady was walking with her basket down the middle of a street in Petrograd to the great 
confusion of the traffic and no small peril to herself. It was pointed out to her that the pavement 
was the place for foot-passengers, but she replied, "I m going to walk where I like. We've got liberty 
now." It did not occur to the dear lady that if liberty entitled the foot-passenger to walk down the 
middle of the road it also entitled the taxi-driver to drive on the pavement, and that the end of such 
liberty would be universal chaos. Everything would be getting in everybody else's way and nobody 
would get anywhere. Individual liberty would have become social anarchy. 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
72. It was pointed out to the lady that she should walk on the pavement because she was  
a) a pedestrian.  
b) carrying a basket.  
c) stout.  
d) an old lady. 
Solution: a) 
Implied in the passage. Common sense will give you the answer. 
 
73. The lady refused to move from the middle of the street because  
a) she was not afraid of being killed.  
b) she felt that she is entitled to do whatever she liked.  
c) she did not like walking on the pavement.  
d) she was confused. 
Solution: b) 
 
74. The old lady failed to realise that  
a) she was not really free.  
b) her liberty was not unlimited.  
c) she was an old person.  
d) roads are made for motor vehicles only 
Solution: b) 
D could have been the answer, but she knew and realized that the roads were for motor vehicles 
only, yet choose to walk there. So B is the more appropriate response. 
 
Directions for the following 6 (six) items: 
Given below are six items. Each item describes a situation and is followed by four possible 
responses. Indicate the response you find most appropriate. Choose only one response for each 
item. The responses will be evaluated based on the level of appropriateness for the given situation. 
Please attempt all the items. There is no penalty for, wrong answers for these six items. 
75. You are the head of your office. There are certain houses reserved for the allotment to the 
office staff and you have been given the discretion to do so. A set of rules for the allotment of the 
houses has been laid down by you and has been made public. Your personal secretary, who is very 
close to you, comes to you and pleads that as his father is seriously ill, he should be given priority 
in allotment of a house. The office secretariat that examined the request as per the rules turns 
down the request and recommends the procedure to be followed according to the rules. You do 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
not want to annoy your personal secretary. In such circumstances, what would you do ?  
 
a) Call him over to your room and personally explain why the allotment cannot be done.  
b) Allot the house to him to win his loyalty.  
c) Agree with the office note to show that you are not biased and that you do not indulge in 
favouritism.  
d) Keep the file with you and not pass any orders. 
Solution: More preferred (a), less preferred (c) 
Option (b) would be abdicating duty, responsibility and decision-making. It gives a very bad signal 
about your administrative and decision-making acumen.  
Option (a) is favouritism and going against the rules. Better avoid this. UPSC traps with such 
questions of loyalty, nepotism and favouritism. 
Options (a) and (c) can be the answer. While (c) is correct, it would be a purely bureaucratic 
approach to handling situations. We recommend and prefer (a) because you will be able to balance 
out all things – decision-making; personal relations; organizational health; rules and procedures; 
integrity and impartiality etc. 
 
76. While travelling in a Delhi-registered commercial taxi from Delhi to an adjacent city (another 
State), your taxi driver informs you that as he has no permit for running the taxi in that city, he will 
stop at its Transport Office and pay the prescribed fee of Rs. forty for a day. While paying the fee 
at the counter you find that the transport clerk is taking an extra fifty rupees for which no receipt 
is being given. You are in a hurry for your meeting. In such circumstances, what would you do?  
 
a) Go up to the counter and ask the clerk to give back the money which he has illegally taken.  
b) Do not interfere at all as this is a matter between the taxi driver and the tax authorities.  
c) Take note of the incident and subsequently report the matter to the concerned authorities.  
d) Treat it as a normal affair and simply forget about it. 
Solution: More preferable (a); less preferable (c) 
Even though you are in hurry, you can definitely ask back the money from the clerk and then later go 
and report the authorities. (c) is less preferable not because of the principle involved, but because 
(a) is more practical in that situation. 
Choosing (a) and (c), you are acting against corruption. This shows uprightness; inclination towards 
justice; dutiful citizenship and zero tolerance for corruption. 
Other options show carelessness; tolerance for corruption and apathy. 
You will have to balance ethics with pragmatism. Thats all. 
 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
77. A person lives in a far off village which is almost two hours by bus. The villager's neighbour is a 
very powerful landlord who is trying to occupy the poor villager's land by force. You are the 
District Magistrate and busy in a meeting called by a local Minister. The villager has come all the 
way, by bus and on foot, to see you and give an application seeking protection from the powerful 
landlord. The villager keeps on waiting outside the meeting hall for an hour. You come out of the 
meeting and are rushing to another meeting. The villager follows you to submit his application. 
What would you do?  
 
a) Tell him to wait for another two hours till you come back from your next meeting.  
b) Tell him that the matter is actually to be dealt by a junior officer and that he should give the 
application to him.  
c) Call one of your senior subordinate officers and ask him to solve the villager's problem.  
d) Quickly take the application from him, ask him a few relevant questions regarding his problem 
and then proceed to the meeting. 
Solution: More preferable (c); less preferable (d) 
While all the options seem reasonable; you have to choose the one that reflects the qualities of a 
citizen-centric civil servant. 
Option (a) is not appropriate; because waiting for 2 hours again for him will not be possible. He is 
from a far off village and has already waited enough. This would give a wrong signal about the 
administration and put the villager’s morale down. 
Option (b) will not be appropriate because a junior officer may not be placed well enough to handle 
the powerful landlord’s issue. Moreover, he has come so far to see you and speak to you about his 
problem. You should not do file and application pushing with him. 
Option (c) is more appropriate because a senior subordinate officer will be better placed to deal with 
his problem. Moreover, you are personally calling the officer and giving him the application. This will 
show the villager that you are taking the matter seriously.  
Option (d) is less preferable because the villager will not have time to discuss his problem. And it 
may give him an impression that you are not taking the matter seriously. Still it is better than (a) and 
(b). 
 
 
78. There is a shortage of sugar in your District where you are the District Magistrate. The 
Government has ordered that only a maximum amount of 30 kg sugar is to be released for 
wedding celebrations. A son of your close friend is getting married and your friend requests you to 
release at least 50 kg sugar for his son's wedding. He expresses annoyance when you tell him 
about the Government's restrictions on this matter. He feels that since you are the District 
Magistrate you can release any amount. You do not want to spoil your friendship with him. In such 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
circumstances, how would you deal with the situation?  
 
a) Release the extra amount of sugar which your friend has requested for  
b) Refuse your friend the extra amount and strictly follow the rules.  
c) Show your friend the copy of the Government instructions and then persuade him to accept the 
lower amount as prescribed in the rules.  
d) Advise him to directly apply to the allotting authority and inform him that you do not interfere in 
this matter. 
Solution: More preferable (c); less preferable (b) 
Option (a) is nepotism and corruption straightaway. 
Option (d) will be abdication of duty and shirking responsibility to save your image and friendship. 
Option (c) is preferable because you will be following rules; avoiding favouritism; and yet be able to 
save the friendship.  
Option (b) is less preferable as denying the quota rudely may cost your friendship. 
This question checks integrity, uprightness and emotional intelligence together. 
 
 
79. You are in-charge of implementing the Family Planning programme in an area where there is a 
strong opposition to the present policy. You want to convince the residents of the need for 
keeping small families. What would be the best way of communicating this message?  
 
a) By logically explaining to the residents the need for family planning to improve the health and 
living standards.  
b) By encouraging late marriages and proper spacing of children.  
c) By offering incentives for adopting family planning devices.  
d) By asking people who have been sterilized or are using contraceptives to directly talk to the 
residents. 
Solution: More preferable (a); less preferable (c) 
Option (b) might not go well with the traditional villagers; hence less pragmatic. 
Option (d) might also not go well with the traditional villagers because they will not like to talk about 
rural taboos like contraception and sterilization. 
Options (a) and (c) go with the cultural context. 
This question checks your cultural sensitivity and emotional intelligence. 
 

 
 
UPSC CSAT 2013 
www.iasbaba.com 
80. You are a teacher in a University and are setting a question paper on a particular subject. One 
of your colleagues, whose son is preparing for the examination on that subject, comes to you and 
informs you that it is his son's last chance to pass that examination and whether you could help 
him by indicating what questions are going to be in the examination. In the past, your colleague 
had helped you in another matter. Your colleague informs you that his son will suffer from 
depression if he fails in this examination. In such circumstances, what would you do?  
 
a) In view of the help he had given you, extend your help to him.  
b) Regret that you cannot be of any help to him.  
c) Explain to your colleague that this would be violating the trust of the University authorities and 
you are not in a position to help him.  
d) Report the conduct of your colleague to the higher authorities 
Solution: More preferable (c); less preferable (b) 
Option (a) is out of question as it is a violation of conduct rules. Option (d) will be extreme and 
unnecessary that too with a colleague who had helped you. It will only spoil your personal relation 
with him. 
Option (b) is straightforward, but (c) is better. Explaining a colleague is always better than outright 
denial.  
The qualities that are being checked are uprightness; integrity; honesty and emotionally intelligence. 
